Originally published in The Saturday Evening Post, May 9, 1942

He was ten. But it had already begun, long before that

day when at last he wrote his age in two figures and he

saw for the first time the camp where his father and Major

de Spain and old General Compson and the others spent

two weeks each November and two weeks again each

June. He had already inherited then, without ever having

seen it, the tremendous bear with one trap-ruined foot

which, in an area almost a hundred miles deep, had

earned itself a name, a definite designation like a living

man.

He had listened to it for years: the long legend of

corncribs rifled, of shotes and grown pigs and even calves

carried bodily into the woods and devoured, of traps and

deadfalls overthrown and dogs mangled and slain, and

shotgun and even rifle charges delivered at point-blank

range and with no more effect than so many peas blown

through a tube by a boy—a corridor of wreckage and

destruction beginning back before he was born, through

which sped, not fast but rather with the ruthless and

irresistible deliberation of a locomotive, the shaggy

tremendous shape.

It ran in his knowledge before he ever saw it. It looked

and towered in his dreams before he even saw the unaxed

woods where it left its crooked print, shaggy, huge, red-
eyed, not malevolent but just big—too big for the dogs

which tried to bay it, for the horses which tried to ride it

down, for the men and the bullets they fired into it, too big

for the very country which was its constricting scope. He

seemed to see it entire with a child’s complete divination

before he ever laid eyes on either—the doomed

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

2

wilderness whose edges were being constantly and punily

gnawed at by men with axes and plows who feared it

because it was wilderness, men myriad and nameless

even to one another in the land where the old bear had

earned a name, through which ran not even a mortal

animal but an anachronism, indomitable and invincible, out

of an old dead time, a phantom, epitome and apotheosis

of the old wild life at which the puny humans swarmed and

hacked in a fury of abhorrence and fear, like pygmies

about the ankles of a drowsing elephant: the old bear

solitary, indomitable and alone, widowered, childless, and

absolved of mortality—old Priam reft of his old wife and

having outlived all his sons.

Until he was ten, each November he would watch the

wagon containing the dogs and the bedding and food and

guns and his father and Tennie’s Jim, the Negro, and Sam

Fathers, the Indian, son of a slave woman and a

Chickasaw chief, depart on the road to town, to Jefferson,

where Major de Spain and the others would join them. To

the boy, at seven, eight, and nine, they were not going into

the Big Bottom to hunt bear and deer, but to keep yearly

rendezvous with the bear which they did not even intend

to kill. Two weeks later they would return, with no trophy,

no head and skin. He had not expected it. He had not

even been afraid it would be in the wagon. He believed

that even after he was ten and his father would let him go

too, for those two weeks in November, he would merely

make another one, along with his father and Major de

Spain and General Compson and the others, the dogs

which feared to bay at it and the rifles and shotguns which

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

3

failed even to bleed it, in the yearly pageant of the old

bear’s furious immortality.

Then he heard the dogs. It was in the second week of

his first time in the camp. He stood with Sam Fathers

against a big oak beside the faint crossing where they had

stood each dawn for nine days now, hearing the dogs. He

had heard them once before, one morning last week—a

murmur, sourceless, echoing through the wet woods,

swelling presently into separate voices which he could

recognize and call by name. He had raised and cocked his

gun as Sam told him and stood motionless again while the

uproar, the invisible course, swept up and past and faded;

it seemed to him that he could actually see the deer, the

buck, blond, smoke-colored, elongated with speed,

fleeing, vanishing, the woods, the gray solitude, still

ringing even when the cries of the dogs had died away.

“Now let the hammers down,” Sam said.

“You knew they were not coming here too,” he said.

“Yes,” Sam said. “I want you to learn how to do when

you didn’t shoot. It’s after the chance for the bear or the

deer has done already come and gone that men and dogs

get killed.”

“Anyway,” he said, “it was just a deer.”

Then on the tenth morning he heard the dogs again.

And he readied the too-long, too-heavy gun as Sam had

taught him, before Sam even spoke. But this time it was

no deer, no ringing chorus of dogs running strong on a

free scent, but a moiling yapping an octave too high, with

something more than indecision and even abjectness in it,

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

4

not even moving very fast, taking a long time to pass

completely out of hearing, leaving then somewhere in the

air that echo, thin, slightly hysterical, abject, almost

grieving, with no sense of a fleeing, unseen, smoke-
colored, grass-eating shape ahead of it, and Sam, who

had taught him first of all to cock the gun and take position

where he could see everywhere and then never move

again, had himself moved up beside him; he could hear

Sam breathing at his shoulder, and he could see the

arched curve of the old man’s inhaling nostrils.

“Hah,” Sam said. “Not even running. Walking.”

“Old Ben!” the boy said. “But up here!” he cried. “Way

up here!”

“He do it every year,” Sam said. “Once. Maybe to see

who in camp this time, if he can shoot or not. Whether we

got the dog yet that can bay and hold him. He’ll take them

to the river, then he’ll send them back home. We may as

well go back too; see how they look when they come back

to camp.”

When they reached the camp the hounds were

already there, ten of them crouching back under the

kitchen, the boy and Sam squatting to peer back into the

obscurity where they had huddled, quiet, the eyes

luminous, glowing at them and vanishing, and no sound,

only that effluvium of something more than dog, stronger

than dog and not just animal, just beast, because still

there had been nothing in front of that abject and almost

painful yapping save the solitude, the wilderness, so that

when the eleventh hound came in at noon and with all the

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

5

others watching—even Old Uncle Ash, who called himself

first a cook—Sam daubed the tattered ear and the raked

shoulder with turpentine and axle grease, to the boy, it was

still no living creature, but the wilderness which, leaning

for the moment down, had patted lightly once the hound’s

temerity.

“Just like a man,” Sam said. “Just like folks. Put off as

long as she could having to be brave, knowing all the time

that sooner or later she would have to be brave to keep on

living with herself, and knowing all the time beforehand

what was going to happen to her when she done it.”

That afternoon, himself on the one-eyed wagon mule

which did not mind the smell of blood nor, as they told him,

of bear, and with Sam on the other one, they rode for more

than three hours through the rapid, shortening winter day.

They followed no path, no trail even that he could see;

almost at once they were in a country which he had never

seen before. Then he knew why Sam had made him ride

the mule which would not spook. The sound one stopped

short and tried to whirl and bolt even as Sam got down,

blowing its breath, jerking and wrenching at the rein, while

Sam held it, coaxing it forward with his voice, since he

could not risk tying it, drawing it forward while the boy got

down from the marred one.

Then, standing beside Sam in the gloom of the dying

afternoon, he looked down at the rotted overturned log,

gutted and scored with claw marks and, in the wet earth

beside it, the print of the enormous warped two-toed foot.

He knew now what he had smelled when he peered under

the kitchen where the dogs huddled. He realized for the

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

6

first time that the bear which had run in his listening and

loomed in his dreams since before he could remember to

the contrary, and which, therefore, must have existed in

the listening and dreams of his father and Major de Spain

and even old General Compson, too, before they began to

remember in their turn, was a mortal animal, and that if

they had departed for the camp each November without

any actual hope of bringing its trophy back, it was not

because it could not be slain, but because so far they had

had no actual hope to.

“Tomorrow,” he said.

“We’ll try tomorrow,” Sam said. “We ain’t got the dog

yet.”

“We’ve got eleven. They ran him this morning.”

“It won’t need but one,” Sam said. “He ain’t here.

Maybe he ain’t nowhere. The only other way will be for him

to run by accident over somebody that has a gun.”

“That wouldn’t be me,” the boy said. “It will be Walter

or Major or—“

“It might,” Sam said. “You watch close in the morning.

Because he’s smart. That’s how come he has lived this

long. If he gets hemmed up and has to pick out somebody

to run over, he will pick out you.”

“How?” the boy said. “How will he know—“ He

ceased. “You mean he already knows me, that I ain’t never

been here before, ain’t had time to find out yet whether I

—“ He ceased again, looking at Sam, the old man whose

face revealed nothing until it smiled. He said humbly, not

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

7

even amazed, “It was me he was watching. I don’t reckon

he did need to come but once.”

The next morning they left the camp three hours

before daylight. They rode this time because it was too far

to walk, even the dogs in the wagon; again the first gray

light found him in a place which he had never seen before,

where Sam had placed him and told him to stay and then

departed. With the gun which was too big for him, which

did not even belong to him, but to Major de Spain, and

which he had fired only once—at a stump on the first day,

to learn the recoil and how to reload it—he stood against a

gum tree beside a little bayou whose black still water crept

without movement out of a canebrake and crossed a small

clearing and into cane again, where invisible, a bird—the

big woodpecker called Lord-to-God by Negroes—clattered

at a dead limb.

It was a stand like any other, dissimilar only in

incidentals to the one where he had stood each morning

for ten days; a territory new to him, yet no less familiar

than that other one which, after almost two weeks, he had

come to believe he knew a little—the same solitude, the

same loneliness through which human beings had merely

passed without altering it, leaving no mark, no scar, which

looked exactly as it must have looked when the first

ancestor of Sam Fathers’ Chickasaw predecessors crept

into it and looked about, club or stone ax or bone arrow

drawn and poised; different only because, squatting at the

edge of the kitchen, he smelled the hounds huddled and

cringing beneath it and saw the raked ear and shoulder of

the one who, Sam said, had had to be brave in order to

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

8

live with herself, and saw yesterday in the earth beside the

gutted log the print of the living foot.

He heard no dogs at all. He never did hear them. He

heard only the drumming of the woodpecker stop short off

and knew that the bear was looking at him. He never saw

it. He did not know whether it was in front of him or behind

him. He did not move, holding the useless gun, which he

had not even had warning to cock and which even now he

did not cock, tasting in his saliva that taint as of brass

which he knew now because he had smelled it when he

peered under the kitchen at the huddled dogs.

Then it was gone. As abruptly as it had ceased, the

woodpecker’s dry, monotonous clatter set up again, and

after a while he even believed he could hear the dogs—a

murmur, scarce a sound even, which he had probably

been hearing for some time before he ever remarked it,

drifting into hearing and then out again, dying away. They

came nowhere near him. If it was a bear they ran, it was

another bear. It was Sam himself who came out of the

cane and crossed the bayou, followed by the injured bitch

of yesterday. She was almost at heel, like a bird dog,

making no sound. She came and crouched against his leg,

trembling, staring off into the cane.

“I didn’t see him,” he said. “I didn’t, Sam!”

“I know it,” Sam said. “He done the looking. You didn’t

hear him neither, did you?”

“No,” the boy said. “I—“

“He’s smart,” Sam said. “Too smart.” He looked down

at the hound, trembling faintly and steadily against the

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

9

boy’s knee. From the raked shoulder a few drops of fresh

blood oozed and clung. “Too big. We ain’t got the dog yet.

But maybe someday. Maybe not next time. But someday.”

So I must see him, he thought. I must look at him.

Otherwise, it seemed to him that it would go on like this

forever, as it had gone on with his father and Major de

Spain, who was older than his father, and even with old

General Compson, who had been old enough to be a

brigade commander in 1865. Otherwise, it would go on so

forever, next time and next time, after and after and after.

It seemed to him that he could never see the two of them,

himself and the bear, shadowy in the limbo from which

time emerged, becoming time; the old bear absolved of

mortality and himself partaking, sharing a little of it,

enough of it. And he knew now what he had smelled in the

huddled dogs and tasted in his saliva. He recognized fear.

So I will have to see him, he thought, without dread or

even hope. I will have to look at him.

It was in June of the next year. He was eleven. They

were in camp again, celebrating Major de Spain’s and

General Compson’s birthdays. Although the one had been

born in September and the other in the depth of winter and

in another decade, they had met for two weeks to fish and

shoot squirrels and turkeys and run coons and wildcats

with the dogs at night. That is, he and Boon Hoggenback

and the Negroes fished and shot squirrels and ran the

coons and cats, because the proved hunters, not only

Major de Spain and old General Compson, who spent

those two weeks sitting in a rocking chair before a

tremendous iron pot of Brunswick stew, stirring and

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

10

tasting, with old Ash to quarrel with about how he was

making it and Tennie’s Jim to pour whiskey from the

demijohn into the tin dipper from which he drank it, but

even the boy’s father and Walter Ewell, who were still

young enough, scorned such, other than shooting the wild

gobblers with pistols for wagers on their marksmanship.

Or, that is, his father and the others believed he was

hunting squirrels. Until the third day, he thought that Sam

Fathers believed that too. Each morning he would leave

the camp right after breakfast. He had his own gun now, a

Christmas present. He went back to the tree beside the

bayou where he had stood that morning. Using the

compass which old General Compson had given him, he

ranged from that point; he was teaching himself to be a

better-than-fair woodsman without knowing he was doing

it. On the second day he even found the gutted log where

he had first seen the crooked print. It was almost

completely crumbled now, healing with unbelievable

speed, a passionate and almost visible relinquishment,

back into the earth from which the tree had grown.

He ranged the summer woods now, green with gloom;

if anything, actually dimmer than in November’s gray

dissolution, where, even at noon, the sun fell only in

intermittent dappling upon the earth, which never

completely dried out and which crawled with snakes—

moccasins and water snakes and rattlers, themselves the

color of the dappling gloom, so that he would not always

see them until they moved, returning later and later, first

day, second day, passing in the twilight of the third evening

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

11

the little log pen enclosing the log stable where Sam was

putting up the horses for the night.

“You ain’t looked right yet,” Sam said.

He stopped. For a moment he didn’t answer. Then he

said peacefully, in a peaceful rushing burst as when a

boy’s miniature dam in a little brook gives way, “All right.

But how? I went to the bayou. I even found that log again.

I—“

“I reckon that was all right. Likely he’s been watching

you. You never saw his foot?”

“I,” the boy said—“I didn’t—I never thought—“

“It’s the gun,” Sam said. He stood beside the fence

motionless—the old man, the Indian, in the battered faded

overalls and the five-cent straw hat which in the Negro’s

race had been the badge of his enslavement and was now

the regalia of his freedom. The camp—the clearing, the

house, the barn and its tiny lot with which Major de Spain

in his turn had scratched punily and evanescently at the

wilderness—faded in the dusk, back into the immemorial

darkness of the woods. The gun, the boy thought. The

gun.

“Be scared,” Sam said. “You can’t help that. But don’t

be afraid. Ain’t nothing in the woods going to hurt you

unless you corner it, or it smells that you are afraid. A bear

or a deer, too, has got to be scared of a coward the same

as a brave man has got to be.”

The gun, the boy thought.

“You will have to choose,” Sam said.

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

12

He left the camp before daylight, long before Uncle

Ash would wake in his quilts on the kitchen floor and start

the fire for breakfast. He had only the compass and a stick

for snakes. He could go almost a mile before he would

begin to need the compass. He say on a log, the invisible

compass in his invisible hand, while the secret night

sounds, fallen still at his movements, scurried again and

then ceased for good, and the owls ceased and gave over

to the waking of day birds, and he could see the compass.

Then he went fast yet still quietly; he was becoming better

and better as a woodsman, still without having yet realized

it.

He jumped a doe and a fawn at sunrise, walked them

out of the bed, close enough to see them—the crash of

undergrowth, the white scut, the fawn scudding behind her

faster than he had believed it could run. He was hunting

right, upwind, as Sam had taught him; not that it mattered

now. He had left the gun; of his own will and

relinquishment he had accepted not a gambit, not a

choice, but a condition in which not only the bear’s

heretofore inviolable anonymity but all the old rules and

balances of hunter and hunted had been abrogated.10 He

would not even be afraid, not even in the moment when

the fear would take him completely—blood, skin, bowels,

bones, memory from the long time before it became his

memory—all save that thin, clear, immortal lucidity which

alone differed him from this bear and from all other bear

and deer he would ever kill in the humility and pride of his

skill and endurance, to which Sam had spoken when he

leaned in the twilight on the lot fence yesterday.

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

13

By noon he was far beyond the little bayou, farther

into the new and alien country than he had ever been. He

was traveling now not only by the old, heavy, biscuit-thick

silver watch which had belonged to his grandfather. When

he stopped at last, it was for the first time since he had

risen from the log at dawn when he could see the

compass. It was far enough. He had left the camp nine

hours ago; nine hours from now, dark would have already

been an hour old. But he didn’t think that. He thought, All

right. Yes. But what? and stood for a moment, alien and

small in the green and topless solitude, answering his own

question before it had formed and ceased. It was the

watch, the compass, the stick—the three lifeless

mechanicals with which for nine hours he had fended the

wilderness off; he hung the watch and compass carefully

on a bush and leaned the stick beside them and

relinquished completely to it.

He had not been going very fast for the last two or

three hours. He went no faster now, since distance would

not matter even if he could have gone fast. And he was

trying to keep a bearing on the tree where he had left the

compass, trying to complete a circle which would bring

him back to it or at least intersect itself, since direction

would not matter now either. But the tree was not there,

and he did as Sam had schooled him—made the next

circle in the opposite direction, so that the two patterns

would bisect somewhere, but crossing no print of his own

feet, finding the tree at last, but in the wrong place—no

bush, no compass, no watch—and the tree not even the

tree, because there was a down log beside it and he did

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

14

what Sam Fathers had told him was the next thing and the

last.

As he sat down on the log he saw the crooked print—

the warped, tremendous, two-toed indentation which, even

as he watched it, filled with water. As he looked up, the

wilderness coalesced, solidified—the glade, the tree he

sought, the bush, the watch and the compass glinting

where a ray of sunshine touched them. Then he saw the

bear. It did not emerge, appear; it was just there,

immobile, solid, fixed in the hot dappling of the green and

windless noon, not as big as he had dreamed it, but as big

as he had expected it, bigger, dimensionless, against the

dappled obscurity, looking at him where he sat quietly on

the log and looked back at it.

Then it moved. It made no sound. It did not hurry. It

crossed the glade, walking for an instant into the full glare

of the sun; when it reached the other side, it stopped again

and looked back at him across one shoulder while his

quiet breathing inhaled and exhaled three times.

Then it was gone. It didn’t walk into the woods, the

undergrowth. It faded, sank back into the wilderness as he

had watched a fish, a huge old bass, sink and vanish into

the dark depths of its pool without even any movement of

its fins.

He thought, It will be next fall. But it was not next fall,

nor the next nor the next. He was fourteen then. He had

killed his buck, and Sam Fathers had marked his face with

the hot blood, and in the next year he killed a bear. But

even before that accolade he had become as competent

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

15

in the woods as many grown men with the same

experience; by his fourteenth year he was a better

woodsman than most grown men with more. There was no

territory within thirty miles of the camp that he did not

know—bayou, ridge, brake, landmark, tree and path. He

could have led anyone to any point in it without deviation,

and brought them out again. He knew the game trails that

even Sam Fathers did not know; in his thirteenth year he

found a buck’s bedding place, and unbeknown to his

father he borrowed Walter Ewell’s rifle and lay in wait at

dawn and killed the buck when it walked back to the bed,

as Sam had told him how the old Chickasaw fathers did.

But not the old bear, although by now he knew its

footprints better than he did his own, and not only the

crooked one. He could see any one of the three sound

ones and distinguish it from any other, and not only by its

size. There were other bears within these thirty miles

which left tracks almost as large, but this was more than

that. If Sam Fathers had been his mentor and the back-
yard rabbits and squirrels at his home his kindergarten,

then the wilderness the old bear ran was his college, the

old male bear itself, so long unwifed and childless as to

have become its own ungendered progenitor, was his alma

mater. But he never saw it.

He could find the crooked print now almost whenever

he liked, fifteen or ten or five miles, or sometimes nearer

the camp than that. Twice while on stand during the three

years he heard the dogs strike its trail by accident; on the

second time they jumped it seemingly, the voices high,

abject, almost human in hysteria, as on that first morning

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

16

two years ago. But not the bear itself. He would remember

that noon three years ago, the glade, himself and the bear

fixed during that moment in the windless and dappled

blaze, and it would seem to him that it had never

happened, that he had dreamed that too. But it had

happened. They had looked at each other, they had

emerged from the wilderness old as earth, synchronized to

the instant by something more than the blood that that

moved the flesh and bones which bore them, and touched,

pledged something, affirmed something more lasting than

the frail web of bones and flesh which any accident could

obliterate.

Then he saw it again. Because of the very fact that he

thought of nothing else, he had forgotten to look for it. He

was still hunting with Walter Ewell’s rifle. He saw it cross

the end of a long blow-down, a corridor where a tornado

had swept, rushing through rather than over the tangle of

trunks and branches as a locomotive would have, faster

than he had ever believed it could move, almost as fast as

a deer even, because a deer would have spent most of

that time in the air, faster than he could bring the rifle

sights up with it. And now he knew what had been wrong

during all the three years. He sat on a log, shaking and

trembling as if he had never seen the woods before nor

anything that ran them, wondering with incredulous

amazement how he could have forgotten the very thing

which Sam Fathers had told him and which the bear itself

had proved the next day and had now returned after three

years to reaffirm.

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

17

And now he knew what Sam Fathers had meant

about the right dog, a dog in which size would mean less

than nothing. So when he returned alone in April—school

was out then, so that the sons of farmers could help with

the land’s planting, and at last his father had granted him

permission, on his promise to be back in four days—he

had the dog. It was his own, a mongrel of the sort called

by Negroes a fyce, a ratter, itself not much bigger than a

rat and possessing that bravery which had long since

stopped being courage and had become foolhardiness.

It did not take four days. Alone again, he found the

trail on the first morning. It was not a stalk; it was an

ambush. He timed the meeting almost as if it were an

appointment with a human being. Himself holding the fyce

muffled in a feed sack and Sam Fathers with two of the

hounds on a piece of plowing rope, they lay down wind of

the trail at dawn of the second morning. They were so

close that the bear turned without even running, as if in

surprised amazement at the shrill and frantic uproar of the

released fyce, turning at bay against the trunk of a tree, on

its hind feet; it seemed to the boy that it would never stop

rising, taller and taller, and even the two hounds seemed

to take a desperate and despairing courage from the fyce,

following it as it went in.

Then he realized that the fyce was actually not going

to stop. He flung, threw the gun away, and ran; when he

overtook and grasped the frantically pin-wheeling little

dog, it seemed to him that he was directly under the bear.

He could smell it, strong and hot and rank. Sprawling,

he looked up to where it loomed and towered over him like

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

18

a cloudburst and colored like a thunderclap, quite familiar,

peacefully and even lucidly familiar, until he remembered:

this was the way he had used to dream about it. Then it

was gone. He didn’t see it go. He knelt, holding the frantic

fyce with both hands, hearing the abashed wailing of the

hounds drawing farther and farther away, until Sam came

up. He carried the gun. He laid it down quietly beside the

boy and stood looking down at him.

“You’ve done seed him twice now with a gun in your

hands,” he said. “This time you couldn’t have missed him.”

The boy rose. He still held the fyce. Even in his arms

and clear of the ground, it yapped frantically, straining and

surging after the fading uproar of the two hounds like a

tangle of wire springs. He was panting a little, but he was

neither shaking nor trembling now. “Neither could you!”

he said. “You had the gun! Neither did you!”

“And you didn’t shoot,” his father said. “How close

were you?”

“I don’t know, sir,” he said. “There was a big wood tick

inside his right hind leg. I saw that. But I didn’t have the

gun then.”

“But you didn’t shoot when you had the gun,” his

father said. “Why?”

But he didn’t answer, and his father didn’t wait for him

to, rising and crossing the room, across the pelt of the

bear which the boy had killed two years ago and the larger

one which his father had killed before he was born, to the

bookcase beneath the mounted head of the boy’s first

buck. It was the room which his father called the office,

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

19

from which all the plantation business was transacted; in it

for the fourteen years of his life he had heard the best of

all talking. Major de Spain would be there and sometimes

old General Compson, and Walter Ewell and Boon

Hoggenback and Sam Fathers and Tennie’s Jim, too, were

hunters, knew the woods and what ran them.

He would hear it, not talking himself, but listening—

the wilderness, the big woods, bigger and older than any

recorded document of white man fatuous enough to

believe he had bought any fragment of it or Indian ruthless

enough to pretend that any fragment of it had been his to

convey. It was of the men, not white nor black nor red, but

men, hunters with the will and hardihood to endure and

the humility and skill to survive, and the dogs and the bear

and deer juxtaposed and reliefed against it, ordered and

compelled by and within the wilderness in the ancient and

unremitting contest by the ancient and immitigable rules

which voided all regrets and brooked no quarter, the

voices quiet and weighty and deliberate for retrospection

and recollection and exact remembering, while he

squatted in the blazing firelight as Tennie’s Jim squatted,

who stirred only to put more wood on the fire and to pass

the bottle from one glass to another. Because the bottle

was always present, so that after a while it seemed to him

that those fierce instants of heart and brain and courage

and wiliness and speed were concentrated and distilled

into that brown liquor which not women, not boys and

children, but only hunters drank, drinking not of the blood

they had spilled but some condensation of the wild

immortal spirit, drinking it moderately, humbly even, not

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

20

with the pagan’s base hope of acquiring the virtues of

cunning and strength and speed, but in salute to them.

His father returned with the book and sat down again

and opened it. “Listen,” he said. He read the five stanzas

aloud, his voice quiet and deliberate in the room where

there was no fire now because it was already spring. Then

he looked up. The boy watched him. “All right,” his father

said. “Listen.” He read again, but only the second stanza

this time, to the end of it, the last two lines, and closed the

book and put it on the table beside him. “She cannot fade,

though thou hast not thy bliss, forever wilt thou love, and

she be fair,” he said.

“He’s talking about a girl,” the boy said.

“He had to talk about something,” his father said.

Then he said, “He was talking about truth. Truth doesn’t

change. Truth is one thing. It covers all things which touch

the heart—honor and pride and pity and justice and

courage and love. Do you see now?”

He didn’t know. Somehow it was simpler than that.

There was an old bear, fierce and ruthless, not merely just

to stay alive, but with the fierce pride of liberty and

freedom, proud enough of the liberty and freedom to see it

threatened without fear or even alarm; nay, who at times

even seemed deliberately to put that freedom and liberty

in jeopardy in order to savor them, to remind his old strong

bones and flesh to keep supple and quick to defend and

preserve them. There was an old man, son of a Negro

slave and an Indian king, inheritor on the one side of the

long chronicle of a people who had learned humility

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

21

through suffering, and pride through the endurance which

survived the suffering and injustice, and on the other side,

the chronicle of a people even longer in the land than the

first, yet who no longer existed in the land at all save in the

solitary brotherhood of an old Negro’s alien blood and the

wild and invincible spirit of an old bear. There was a boy

who wished to learn humility and pride in order to become

skillful and worthy in the woods, who suddenly found

himself becoming so skillful so rapidly that he feared he

would ever become worthy because he had not learned

humility and pride, although he had tried to, until one day

and as suddenly he discovered that an old man who could

not have defined either had led him, as though by the

hand, to that point where an old bear and a little mongrel

of a dog showed him that, by possessing one thing other,

he would possess them both.

And a little dog, nameless and mongrel and many-
fathered, grown, yet weighing less than six pounds, saying

as if to itself, “I can’t be dangerous, because there’s

nothing much smaller than I am; I can’t be fierce, because

they would call it just a noise; I can’t be humble, because

I’m already too close to the ground to genuflect; I can’t be

proud, because I wouldn’t be near enough to it for anyone

to know who was casting the shadow, and I don’t even

know that I’m not going to heaven, because they have

already decided that I don’t possess an immortal soul. So

all I can be is brave. But it’s all right. I can be that, even if

they still call it just noise.”

That was all. It was simple, much simpler than

somebody talking in a book about youth and a girl he

“The Bear” (1942) by William Faulkner

22

would never need to grieve over, because he could never

approach any nearer her and would never have to get any

farther away. He had heard about a bear, and finally got

big enough to trail it, and he trailed it four years and at last

met it with a gun in his hands and he didn’t shoot.

Because a little dog—but he could have shot long before

the little dog covered the twenty yards to where the bear

waited, and Sam Fathers could have shot at any time

during that interminable minute while Old Ben stood on his

hind feet over them. He stopped. His father was watching

him gravely across the spring-rife twilight of the room;

when he spoke, his words were as quiet as the twilight,

too, not loud, because they did not need to be because

they would last. “Courage, and honor, and pride,” his

father said, “and pity, and love of justice and of liberty.

They all touch the heart, and what the heart holds to

becomes truth, as far as we know the truth. Do you see

now?”

Sam, and Old Ben, and Nip, he thought. And himself

too. He had been all right too. His father had said so. “Yes,

sir,” he said.