
* A Series Of Unfortunate Events *
BOOK the First
THE BAD BEGINNING
by LEMONY SNICKET
HarperCollinsPublishers
To Beatrice---
darling, dearest, dead.
Chapter
One
If you are interested in stories with happy endings, you would be better off reading some other book. In
this book, not only is there no happy ending, there is no happy beginning and very few happy things in the
middle. This is because not very many happy things happened in the lives of the three Baudelaire
youngsters. Violet, Klaus, and Sunny Baudelaire were intelligent children, and they were charming, and
resourceful, and had pleasant facial features, but they were extremely unlucky, and most everything that
happened to themwas rife with misfortune, misery, and despair. I’msorry to tell you this, but that is how
the story goes.
Their misfortune began one day at Briny Beach. The three Baudelaire children lived with their parents
in an enormous mansion at the heart of a dirty and busy city, and occasionally their parents gave them
permission to take a rickety trolley-the word “rickety,” you probably know, here means “unsteady” or
“likely to collapse”-alone to the seashore, where they would spend the day as a sort of vacation as long
as they were home for dinner. This particular morning it was gray and cloudy, which didn’t bother the
Baudelaire youngsters one bit. When it was hot and sunny, Briny Beach was crowded with tourists and it
was impossible to find a good place to lay one’s blanket. On gray and cloudy days, the Baudelaires had
the beach to themselves to do what they liked.
Violet Baudelaire, the eldest, liked to skip rocks. Like most fourteen-year-olds, she was right-handed,
so the rocks skipped farther across the murky water when Violet used her right hand than when she used
her left. As she skipped rocks, she was looking out at the horizon and thinking about an invention she
wanted to build. Anyone who knew Violet well could tell she was thinking hard, because her long hair
was tied up in a ribbon to keep it out of her eyes. Violet had a real knack for inventing and building
strange devices, so her brain was often filled with images of pulleys, levers, and gears, and she never
wanted to be distracted by something as trivial as her hair. This morning she was thinking about how to
construct a device that could retrieve a rock after you had skipped it into the ocean.
Klaus Baudelaire, the middle child, and the only boy, liked to examine creatures in tide-pools. Klaus
was a little older than twelve and wore glasses, which made himlook intelligent. He was intelligent. The
Baudelaire parents had an enormous library in their mansion, a roomfilled with thousands of books on
nearly every subject. Being only twelve, Klaus of course had not read all of the books in the Baudelaire
library, but he had read a great many of themand had retained a lot of the information fromhis readings.
He knew how to tell an alligator froma crocodile. He knew who killed Julius Caesar. And he knew much
about the tiny, slimy animals found at Briny Beach, which he was examining now.
Sunny Baudelaire, the youngest, liked to bite things. She was an infant, and very small for her age,
scarcely larger than a boot. What she lacked in size, however, she made up for with the size and
sharpness of her four teeth. Sunny was at an age where one mostly speaks in a series of unintelligible
shrieks. Except when she used the few actual words in her vocabulary, like “bottle,” “mommy,” and
“bite,” most people had trouble understanding what it was that Sunny was saying. For instance, this
morning she was saying “Gack!” over and over, which probably meant, “Look at that mysterious figure
emerging fromthe fog!”
Sure enough, in the distance along the misty shore of Briny Beach there could be seen a tall figure
striding toward the Baudelaire children. Sunny had already been staring and shrieking at the figure for
some time when Klaus looked up fromthe spiny crab he was examining, and saw it too. He reached over
and touched Violet’s arm, bringing her out of her inventing thoughts.
“Look at that,” Klaus said, and pointed toward the figure. It was drawing closer, and the children could
see a few details. It was about the size of an adult, except its head was tall, and rather square.
“What do you think it is?” Violet asked.
“I don’t know,” Klaus said, squinting at it, “but it seems to be moving right toward us.”
“We’re alone on the beach,” Violet said, a little nervously. “There’s nobody else it could be moving
toward.” She felt the slender, smooth stone in her left hand, which she had been about to try to skip as far
as she could. She had a sudden thought to throw it at the figure, because it seemed so frightening.
“It only seems scary,” Klaus said, as if reading his sister’s thoughts, “because of all the mist.”
This was true. As the figure reached them, the children saw with relief that it was not anybody
frightening at all, but somebody they knew: Mr. Poe. Mr. Poe was a friend of Mr. and Mrs. Baudelaire’s
whomthe children had met many times at dinner parties. One of the things Violet, Klaus, and Sunny really
liked about their parents was that they didn’t send their children away when they had company over, but
allowed themto join the adults at the dinner table and participate in the conversation as long as they
helped clear the table. The children remembered Mr. Poe because he always had a cold and was
constantly excusing himself fromthe table to have a fit of coughing in the next room.
Mr. Poe took off his top hat, which had made his head look large and square in the fog, and stood for a
moment, coughing loudly into a white handkerchief. Violet and Klaus moved forward to shake his hand
and say how do you do.
“How do you do?” said Violet.
“How do you do?” said Klaus.
“Odo yow!” said Sunny.
“Fine, thank you,” said Mr. Poe, but he looked very sad. For a few seconds nobody said anything, and
the children wondered what Mr. Poe was doing there at Briny Beach, when he should have been at the
bank in the city, where he worked. He was not dressed for the beach.
“It’s a nice day,” Violet said finally, making conversation. Sunny made a noise that sounded like an
angry bird, and Klaus picked her up and held her.
“Yes, it is a nice day,” Mr. Poe said absently, staring out at the empty beach. “I’mafraid I have some
very bad news for you children.”
The three Baudelaire siblings looked at him. Violet, with some embarrassment, felt the stone in her left
hand and was glad she had not thrown it at Mr. Poe.
“Your parents,” Mr. Poe said, “have perished in a terrible fire.”
The children didn’t say anything.
“They perished,” Mr. Poe said, “in a fire that destroyed the entire house. I’mvery, very sorry to tell
you this, my dears.”
Violet took her eyes off Mr. Poe and stared out at the ocean. Mr. Poe had never called the Baudelaire
children “my dears” before. She understood the words he was saying but thought he must be joking,
playing a terrible joke on her and her brother and sister.
“ ‘Perished,’ ” Mr. Poe said, “means ‘killed.’ ”
“We know what the word ‘perished’ means,” Klaus said, crossly. He did know what the word
“perished” meant, but he was still having trouble understanding exactly what it was that Mr. Poe had said.
It seemed to himthat Mr. Poe must somehow have misspoken.
“The fire department arrived, of course,” Mr. Poe said, “but they were too late. The entire house was
engulfed in fire. It burned to the ground.”
Klaus pictured all the books in the library, going up in flames. Now he’d never read all of them.
Mr. Poe coughed several times into his handkerchief before continuing. “I was sent to retrieve you
here, and to take you to my home, where you’ll stay for some time while we figure things out. I amthe
executor of your parents’ estate. That means I will be handling their enormous fortune and figuring out
where you children will go. When Violet comes of age, the fortune will be yours, but the bank will take
charge of it until you are old enough.”
Although he said he was the executor, Violet felt like Mr. Poe was the executioner. He had simply
walked down the beach to themand changed their lives forever.
“Come with me,” Mr. Poe said, and held out his hand. In order to take it, Violet had to drop the stone
she was holding. Klaus took Violet’s other hand, and Sunny took Klaus’s other hand, and in that manner
the three Baudelaire children-the Baudelaire orphans, now-were led away fromthe beach and fromtheir
previous lives.
Chapter
Two
It is useless for me to describe to you how terrible Violet, Klaus, and even Sunny felt in the time that
followed. If you have ever lost someone very important to you, then you already know how it feels, and if
you haven’t, you cannot possibly imagine it. For the Baudelaire children, it was of course especially
terrible because they had lost both their parents at the same time, and for several days they felt so
miserable they could scarcely get out of bed. Klaus found he had little interest in books. The gears in
Violet’s inventive brain seemed to stop. And even Sunny, who of course was too young to really
understand what was going on, bit things with less enthusiasm.
Of course, it didn’t make things any easier that they had lost their home as well, and all their
possessions. As I’msure you know, to be in one’s own room, in one’s own bed, can often make a bleak
situation a little better, but the beds of the Baudelaire orphans had been reduced to charred rubble. Mr.
Poe had taken themto the remains of the Baudelaire mansion to see if anything had been unharmed, and it
was terrible: Violet’s microscope had fused together in the heat of the fire, Klaus’s favorite pen had
turned to ash, and all of Sunny’s teething rings had melted. Here and there, the children could see traces of
the enormous home they had loved: fragments of their grand piano, an elegant bottle in which Mr.
Baudelaire kept brandy, the scorched cushion of the windowseat where their mother liked to sit and read.
Their home destroyed, the Baudelaires had to recuperate fromtheir terrible loss in the Poe household,
which was not at all agreeable. Mr. Poe was scarcely at home, because he was very busy attending to the
Baudelaire affairs, and when he was home he was often coughing so much he could barely have a
conversation. Mrs. Poe purchased clothing for the orphans that was in grotesque colors, and itched. And
the two Poe children-Edgar and Albert-were loud and obnoxious boys with whomthe Baudelaires had to
share a tiny roomthat smelled of some sort of ghastly flower.
But even given the surroundings, the children had mixed feelings when, over a dull dinner of boiled
chicken, boiled potatoes and blanched-the word “blanched” here means “boiled”-string beans, Mr. Poe
announced that they were to leave his household the next morning.
“Good,” said Albert, who had a piece of potato stuck between his teeth. “Now we can get our room
back. I’mtired of sharing it. Violet and Klaus are always moping around, and are never any fun.”
“And the baby bites,” Edgar said, tossing a chicken bone to the floor as if he were an animal in a zoo
and not the son of a well-respected member of the banking community.
“Where will we go?” Violet asked nervously.
Mr. Poe opened his mouth to say something, but erupted into a brief fit of coughing. “I have made
arrangements,” he said finally, “for you to be raised by a distant relative of yours who lives on the other
side of town. His name is Count Olaf.”
Violet, Klaus, and Sunny looked at one another, unsure of what to think. On one hand, they didn’t want
to live with the Poes any longer. On the other hand, they had never heard of Count Olaf and didn’t know
what he would be like.
“Your parents’ will,” Mr. Poe said, “instructs that you be raised in the most convenient way possible.
Here in the city, you’ll be used to your surroundings, and this Count Olaf is the only relative who lives
within the urban limits.”
Klaus thought this over for a minute as he swallowed a chewy bit of bean. “But our parents never
mentioned Count Olaf to us. Just how is he related to us, exactly?”
Mr. Poe sighed and looked down at Sunny, who was biting a fork and listening closely. “He is either a
third cousin four times removed, or a fourth cousin three times removed. He is not your closest relative on
the family tree, but he is the closest geographically. That’s why-”
“If he lives in the city,” Violet said, “why didn’t our parents ever invite himover?”
“Possibly because he was very busy,” Mr. Poe said. “He’s an actor by trade, and often travels around
the world with various theater companies.”
“I thought he was a count,” Klaus said.
“He is both a count and an actor,” Mr. Poe said. “Now, I don’t mean to cut short our dinner, but you
children have to pack up your things, and I have to return to the bank to do some more work. Like your
new legal guardian, I amvery busy myself.”
The three Baudelaire children had many more questions for Mr. Poe, but he had already stood up from
the table, and with a slight wave of his hand departed fromthe room. They heard himcoughing into his
handkerchief and then the front door creaked shut as he left the house.
“Well,” Mrs. Poe said, “you three had better start packing. Edgar, Albert, please help me clear the
table.”
The Baudelaire orphans went to the bedroomand glumly packed their few belongings. Klaus looked
distastefully at each ugly shirt Mrs. Poe had bought for himas he folded themand put theminto a small
suitcase. Violet looked around the cramped, smelly roomin which they had been living. And Sunny
crawled around solemnly biting each of Edgar and Albert’s shoes, leaving small teeth marks in each one
so she would not be forgotten. Fromtime to time, the Baudelaire children looked at one another, but with
their future such a mystery they could think of nothing to say. At bedtime, they tossed and turned all night,
scarcely getting any sleep between the loud snoring of Edgar and Albert and their own worried thoughts.
Finally, Mr. Poe knocked on the door and stuck his head into the bedroom.
“Rise and shine, Baudelaires,” he said. “It’s time for you to go to Count Olaf’s.”
Violet looked around the crowded bedroom, and even though she didn’t like it, she felt very nervous
about leaving. “Do we have to go right this minute?” she asked.
Mr. Poe opened his mouth to speak, but had to cough a few times before he began. “Yes you do. I’m
dropping you off on my way to the bank, so we need to leave as soon as possible. Please get out of bed
and get dressed,” he said briskly. The word “briskly” here means “quickly, so as to get the Baudelaire
children to leave the house.”
The Baudelaire children left the house. Mr. Poe’s automobile rumbled along the cobble-stone streets of
the city toward the neighborhood where Count Olaf lived. They passed horse-drawn carriages and
motorcycles along DoldrumDrive. They passed the Fickle Fountain, an elaborately carved monument that
occasionally spat out water in which young children played. They passed an enormous pile of dirt where
the Royal Gardens once stood. Before too long, Mr. Poe drove his car down a narrow alley lined with
houses made of pale brick and stopped halfway down the block.
“Here we are,” Mr. Poe said, in a voice undoubtedly meant to be cheerful. “Your new home.”
The Baudelaire children looked out and saw the prettiest house on the block. The bricks had been
cleaned very well, and through the wide and open windows one could see an assortment of well-groomed
plants. Standing in the doorway, with her hand on the shiny brass doorknob, was an older woman, smartly
dressed, who was smiling at the children. In one hand she carried a flowerpot.
“Hello there!” she called out. “You must be the children Count Olaf is adopting.”
Violet opened the door of the automobile and got out to shake the woman’s hand. It felt firmand warm,
and for the first time in a long while Violet felt as if her life and the lives of her siblings might turn out
well after all. “Yes,” she said. “Yes, we are. I amViolet Baudelaire, and this is my brother Klaus and my
sister Sunny. And this is Mr. Poe, who has been arranging things for us since the death of our parents.”
“Yes, I heard about the accident,” the woman said, as everyone said how do you do. “I amJustice
Strauss.”
“That’s an unusual first name,” Klaus remarked.
“It is my title,” she explained, “not my first name. I serve as a judge on the High Court.”
“How fascinating,” Violet said. “And are you married to Count Olaf?”
“Goodness me no,” Justice Strauss said. “I don’t actually know himthat well. He is my next-door
neighbor.”
The children looked fromthe well-scrubbed house of Justice Strauss to the dilapidated one next door.
The bricks were stained with soot and grime. There were only two small windows, which were closed
with the shades drawn even though it was a nice day. Rising above the windows was a tall and dirty
tower that tilted slightly to the left. The front door needed to be repainted, and carved in the middle of it
was an image of an eye. The entire building sagged to the side, like a crooked tooth.
“Oh!” said Sunny, and everyone knew what she meant. She meant, “What a terrible place! I don’t want
to live there at all!”
“Well, it was nice to meet you,” Violet said to Justice Strauss.
“Yes,” said Justice Strauss, gesturing to her flowerpot. “Perhaps one day you could come over and
help me with my gardening.”
“That would be very pleasant,” Violet said, very sadly. It would, of course, be very pleasant to help
Justice Strauss with her gardening, but Violet could not help thinking that it would be more pleasant to
live in Justice Strauss’s house, instead of Count Olaf’s. What kind of a man, Violet wondered, would
carve an image of an eye into his front door?
Mr. Poe tipped his hat to Justice Strauss, who smiled at the children and disappeared into her lovely
house. Klaus stepped forward and knocked on Count Olaf’s door, his knuckles rapping right in the middle
of the carved eye. There was a pause, and then the door creaked open and the children saw Count Olaf for
the first time.
“Hello hello hello,” Count Olaf said in a wheezy whisper. He was very tall and very thin, dressed in a
gray suit that had many dark stains on it. His face was unshaven, and rather than two eyebrows, like most
human beings have, he had just one long one. His eyes were very, very shiny, which made himlook both
hungry and angry. “Hello, my children. Please step into your new home, and wipe your feet outside so no
mud gets indoors.”
As they stepped into the house, Mr. Poe behind them, the Baudelaire orphans realized what a ridiculous
thing Count Olaf had just said. The roomin which they found themselves was the dirtiest they had ever
seen, and a little bit of mud fromoutdoors wouldn’t have made a bit of difference. Even by the dimlight
of the one bare lightbulb that hung fromthe ceiling, the three children could see that everything in this
roomwas filthy, fromthe stuffed head of a lion which was nailed to the wall to the bowl of apple cores
which sat on a small wooden table.
Klaus willed himself not to cry as he looked around.
“This roomlooks like it needs a little work,” Mr. Poe said, peering around in the gloom.
“I realize that my humble home isn’t as fancy as the Baudelaire mansion,” Count Olaf said, “but
perhaps with a bit of your money we could fix it up a little nicer.”
Mr. Poe’s eyes widened in surprise, and his coughs echoed in the dark roombefore he spoke.
“The Baudelaire fortune,” he said sternly, “will not be used for such matters. In fact, it will not be used
at all, until Violet is of age.”
Count Olaf turned to Mr. Poe with a glint in his eye like an angry dog. For a moment Violet thought he
was going to strike Mr. Poe across the face. But then he swallowed-the children could see his Adam’s
apple bob in his skinny throat-and shrugged his patchy shoulders.
“All right then,” he said. “It’s the same to me. Thank you very much, Mr. Poe, for bringing themhere.
Children, I will now show you to your room.”
“Good-bye, Violet, Klaus, and Sunny,” Mr. Poe said, stepping back through the front door. “I hope you
will be very happy here. I will continue to see you occasionally, and you can always contact me at the
bank if you have any questions.”
“But we don’t even know where the bank is,” Klaus said.
“I have a map of the city,” Count Olaf said. “Good-bye, Mr. Poe.”
He leaned forward to shut the door, and the Baudelaire orphans were too overcome with despair to get
a last glimpse of Mr. Poe. They now wished they could all stay at the Poe household, even though it
smelled. Rather than looking at the door, then, the orphans looked down, and saw that although Count Olaf
was wearing shoes, he wasn’t wearing any socks. They could see, in the space of pale skin between his
tattered trouser cuff and his black shoe, that Count Olaf had an image of an eye tattooed on his ankle,
matching the eye on his front door. They wondered how many other eyes were in Count Olaf’s house, and
whether, for the rest of their lives, they would always feel as though Count Olaf were watching themeven
when he wasn’t nearby.
Chapter
Three
I don’t know if you’ve ever noticed this, but first impressions are often entirely wrong. You can look at a
painting for the first time, for example, and not like it at all, but after looking at it a little longer you may
find it very pleasing. The first time you try Gorgonzola cheese you may find it too strong, but when you
are older you may want to eat nothing but Gorgonzola cheese. Klaus, when Sunny was born, did not like
her at all, but by the time she was six weeks old the two of themwere thick as thieves. Your initial
opinion on just about anything may change over time.
I wish I could tell you that the Baudelaires’ first impressions of Count Olaf and his house were
incorrect, as first impressions so often are. But these impressions-that Count Olaf was a horrible person,
and his house a depressing pigsty-were absolutely correct. During the first few days after the orphans
arrival at Count Olaf’s, Violet, Klaus, and Sunny attempted to make themselves feel at home, but it was
really no use. Even though Count Olaf’s house was quite large, the three children were placed together in
one filthy bedroomthat had only one small bed in it. Violet and Klaus took turns sleeping in it, so that
every other night one of themwas in the bed and the other was sleeping on the hard wooden floor, and the
bed’s mattress was so lumpy it was difficult to say who was more uncomfortable. To make a bed for
Sunny, Violet removed the dusty curtains fromthe curtain rod that hung over the bedroom’s one window
and bunched themtogether to forma sort of cushion, just big enough for her sister. However, without
curtains over the cracked glass, the sun streamed through the window every morning, so the children woke
up early and sore each day. Instead of a closet, there was a large cardboard box that had once held a
refrigerator and would now hold the three children’s clothes, all piled in a heap. Instead of toys, books,
or other things to amuse the youngsters, Count Olaf had provided a small pile of rocks. And the only
decoration on the peeling walls was a large and ugly painting of an eye, matching the one on Count Olaf’s
ankle and all over the house.
But the children knew, as I’msure you know, that the worst surroundings in the world can be tolerated
if the people in themare interesting and kind. Count Olaf was neither interesting nor kind; he was
demanding, short-tempered, and bad-smelling. The only good thing to be said for Count Olaf is that he
wasn’t around very often. When the children woke up and chose their clothing out of the refrigerator box,
they would walk into the kitchen and find a list of instructions left for themby Count Olaf, who would
often not appear until nighttime. Most of the day he spent out of the house, or up in the high tower, where
the children were forbidden to go. The instructions he left for themwere usually difficult chores, such as
repainting the back porch or repairing the windows, and instead of a signature Count Olaf would draw an
eye at the bottomof the note.
One morning his note read, “My theater troupe will be coming for dinner before tonight’s performance.
Have dinner ready for all ten of themby the time they arrive at seven o’clock. Buy the food, prepare it, set
the table, serve dinner, clean up afterwards, and stay out of our way.” Below that there was the usual eye,
and underneath the note was a small sumof money for the groceries.
Violet and Klaus read the note as they ate their breakfast, which was a gray and lumpy oatmeal Count
Olaf left for themeach morning in a large pot on the stove. Then they looked at each other in dismay.
“None of us knows how to cook,” Klaus said.
“That’s true,” Violet said. “I knew how to repair those windows, and how to clean the chimney,
because those sorts of things interest me. But I don’t know how to cook anything except toast.”
“And sometimes you burn the toast,” Klaus said, and they smiled. They were both remembering a time
when the two of themgot up early to make a special breakfast for their parents. Violet had burned the
toast, and their parents, smelling smoke, had run downstairs to see what the matter was. When they saw
Violet and Klaus, looking forlornly at pieces of pitch-black toast, they laughed and laughed, and then
made pancakes for the whole family.
“I wish they were here,” Violet said. She did not have to explain she was talking about their parents.
“They would never let us stay in this dreadful place.”
“If they were here,” Klaus said, his voice rising as he got more and more upset, “we would not be with
Count Olaf in the first place. I hate it here, Violet! I hate this house! I hate our room! I hate having to do
all these chores, and I hate Count Olaf!”
“I hate it too,” Violet said, and Klaus looked at his older sister with relief. Sometimes, just saying that
you hate something, and having someone agree with you, can make you feel better about a terrible
situation. “I hate everything about our lives right now, Klaus,” she said, “but we have to keep our chin
up.” This was an expression the children’s father had used, and it meant “try to stay cheerful.”
“You’re right,” Klaus said. “But it is very difficult to keep one’s chin up when Count Olaf keeps
shoving it down.”
“Jook!” Sunny shrieked, banging on the table with her oatmeal spoon. Violet and Klaus were jerked out
of their conversation and looked once again at Count Olaf’s note.
“Perhaps we could find a cookbook, and read about how to cook,” Klaus said. “It shouldn’t be that
difficult to make a simple meal.” Violet and Klaus spent several minutes opening and shutting Count
Olaf’s kitchen cupboards, but there weren’t any cookbooks to be found.
“I can’t say I’msurprised,” Violet said. “We haven’t found any books in this house at all.”
“I know,” Klaus said miserably. “I miss reading very much. We must go out and look for a library
sometime soon.”
“But not today,” Violet said. “Today we have to cook for ten people.”
At that moment there was a knock on the front door. Violet and Klaus looked at one another nervously.
“Who in the world would want to visit Count Olaf?” Violet wondered out loud.
“Maybe somebody wants to visit us,” Klaus said, without much hope. In the time since the Baudelaire
parent’s death, most of the Baudelaire orphans’ friends had fallen by the wayside, an expression which
here means “they stopped calling, writing, and stopping by to see any of Baudelaires, making themvery
lonely.” You and I, of course, would never do this to any of our grieving acquaintances, but it is a sad
truth in life that when someone has lost a loved one, friends sometimes avoid the person, just when the
presence of friends is most needed.
Violet, Klaus, and Sunny walked slowly to the front door and peered through the peephole, which was
in the shape of an eye. They were delighted to see Justice Strauss peering back at them, and opened the
door.
“Justice Strauss!” Violet cried. “How lovely to see you.” She was about to add, “Do come in,” but then
she realized that Justice Strauss would probably not want to venture into the dimand dirty room.
“Please forgive me for not stopping by sooner,” Justice Strauss said, as the Baudelaires stood
awkwardly in the doorway. “I wanted to see how you children were settling in, but I had a very difficult
case in the High Court and it was taking up much of my time.”
“What sort of case was it?” Klaus asked. Having been deprived of reading, he was hungry for new
information.
“I can’t really discuss it,” Justice Strauss said, “because it’s official business. But I can tell you it
concerns a poisonous plant and illegal use of someone’s credit card.”
“Yeeka!” Sunny shrieked, which appeared to mean “How interesting!” although of course there is no
way that Sunny could understand what was being said.
Justice Strauss looked down at Sunny and laughed. “Yeeka indeed,” she said, and reached down to pat
the child on the head. Sunny took Justice Strauss’s hand and bit it, gently.
“That means she likes you,” Violet explained.
“She bites very, very hard if she doesn’t like you, or if you want to give her a bath.”
“I see,” Justice Strauss said. “Now then, how are you children getting on? Is there anything you
desire?”
The children looked at one another, thinking of all the things they desired. Another bed, for example. A
proper crib for Sunny. Curtains for the window in their room. A closet instead of a cardboard box. But
what they desired most of all, of course, was not to be associated with Count Olaf in any way whatsoever.
What they desired most was to be with their parents again, in their true home, but that, of course, was
impossible. Violet, Klaus, and Sunny all looked down at the floor unhappily as they considered the
question. Finally, Klaus spoke.
“Could we perhaps borrow a cookbook?” he said. “Count Olaf has instructed us to make dinner for his
theater troupe tonight, and we can’t find a cookbook in the house.”
“Goodness,” Justice Strauss said. “Cooking dinner for an entire theater troupe seems like a lot to ask of
children.”
“Count Olaf gives us a lot of responsibility,” Violet said. What she wanted to say was, “Count Olaf is
an evil man,” but she was well mannered.
“Well, why don’t you come next door to my house,” Justice Strauss said, “and find a cookbook that
pleases you?”
The youngsters agreed, and followed Justice Strauss out the door and over to her well-kept house. She
led themthrough an elegant hallway smelling of flowers into an enormous room, and when they saw what
was inside, they nearly fainted fromdelight, Klaus especially.
The roomwas a library. Not a public library, but a private library; that is, a large collection of books
belonging to Justice Strauss. There were shelves and shelves of them, on every wall fromthe floor to the
ceiling, and separate shelves and shelves of themin the middle of the room. The only place there weren’t
books was in one corner, where there were some large, comfortable-looking chairs and a wooden table
with lamps hanging over them, perfect for reading. Although it was not as big as their parents’ library, it
was as cozy, and the Baudelaire children were thrilled.
“My word!” Violet said. “This is a wonderful library!”
“Thank you very much,” Justice Strauss said. “I’ve been collecting books for years, and I’mvery proud
of my collection. As long as you keep themin good condition, you are welcome to use any of my books, at
any time. Now, the cookbooks are over here on the eastern wall. Shall we have a look at them?”
“Yes,” Violet said, “and then, if you don’t mind, I should love to look at any of your books concerning
mechanical engineering. Inventing things is a great interest of mine.”
“And I would like to look at books on wolves,” Klaus said. “Recently I have been fascinated by the
subject of wild animals of North America.”
“Book!” Sunny shrieked, which meant “Please don’t forget to pick out a picture book for me.”
Justice Strauss smiled. “It is a pleasure to see young people interested in books,” she said. “But first I
think we’d better find a good recipe, don’t you?”
The children agreed, and for thirty minutes or so they perused several cookbooks that Justice Strauss
recommended. To tell you the truth, the three orphans were so excited to be out of Count Olaf’s house, and
in this pleasant library, that they were a little distracted and unable to concentrate on cooking. But finally
Klaus found a dish that sounded delicious, and easy to make.
“Listen to this,” he said. “ ‘Puttanesca.’ It’s an Italian sauce for pasta. All we need to do is sauté
olives, capers, anchovies, garlic, chopped parsley, and tomatoes together in a pot, and prepare spaghetti
to go with it.”
“That sounds easy,” Violet agreed, and the Baudelaire orphans looked at one another. Perhaps, with the
kind Justice Strauss and her library right next door, the children could prepare pleasant lives for
themselves as easily as making puttanesca sauce for Count Olaf.
Chapter
Four
The Baudelaire orphans copied the puttanesca recipe fromthe cookbook onto a piece of scrap paper, and
Justice Strauss was kind enough to escort themto the market to buy the necessary ingredients. Count Olaf
had not left themvery much money, but the children were able to buy everything they needed. Froma
street vendor, they purchased olives after tasting several varieties and choosing their favorites. At a pasta
store they selected interestingly shaped noodles and asked the woman running the store the proper amount
for thirteen people-the ten people Count Olaf mentioned, and the three of them. Then, at the supermarket,
they purchased garlic, which is a sharp-tasting bulbous plant; anchovies, which are small salty fish;
capers, which are flower buds of a small shrub and taste marvelous; and tomatoes, which are actually
fruits and not vegetables as most people believe. They thought it would be proper to serve dessert, and
bought several envelopes of pudding mix. Perhaps, the orphans thought, if they made a delicious meal,
Count Olaf might be a bit kinder to them.
“Thank you so much for helping us out today,” Violet said, as she and her siblings walked home with
Justice Strauss. “I don’t know what we would have done without you.”
“You seemlike very intelligent people,” Justice Strauss said. “I daresay you would have thought of
something. But it continues to strike me as odd that Count Olaf has asked you to prepare such an enormous
meal. Well, here we are. I must go inside and put my own groceries away. I hope you children will come
over soon and borrow books frommy library.”
“Tomorrow?” Klaus said quickly. “Could we come over tomorrow?”
“I don’t see why not,” Justice Strauss said, smiling.
“I can’t tell you how much we appreciate this,” Violet said, carefully. With their kind parents dead and
Count Olaf treating themso abominably, the three children were not used to kindness fromadults, and
weren’t sure if they were expected to do anything back. “Tomorrow, before we use your library again,
Klaus and I would be more than happy to do household chores for you. Sunny isn’t really old enough to
work, but I’msure we could find some way she could help you.”
Justice Strauss smiled at the three children, but her eyes were sad. She reached out a hand and put it on
Violet’s hair, and Violet felt more comforted than she had in some time. “That won’t be necessary,”
Justice Strauss said. “You are always welcome in my home.” Then she turned and went into her home,
and after a moment of staring after her, the Baudelaire orphans went into theirs.
For most of the afternoon, Violet, Klaus, and Sunny cooked the puttanesca sauce according to the
recipe. Violet roasted the garlic and washed and chopped the anchovies. Klaus peeled the tomatoes and
pitted the olives. Sunny banged on a pot with a wooden spoon, singing a rather repetitive song she had
written herself. And all three of the children felt less miserable than they had since their arrival at Count
Olaf’s. The smell of cooking food is often a calming one, and the kitchen grew cozy as the sauce
simmered, a culinary termwhich means “cooked over low heat.”
The three orphans spoke of pleasant memories of their parents and about Justice Strauss, who they
agreed was a wonderful neighbor and in whose library they planned to spend a great deal of time. As they
talked, they mixed and tasted the chocolate pudding.
Just as they were placing the pudding in the refrigerator to cool, Violet, Klaus, and Sunny heard a loud,
booming sound as the front door was flung open, and I’msure I don’t have to tell you who was home.
“Orphans?” Count Olaf called out in his scratchy voice. “Where are you, orphans?”
“In the kitchen, Count Olaf,” Klaus called. “We’re just finishing dinner.”
“You’d better be,” Count Olaf said, and strode into the kitchen. He gazed at all three Baudelaire
children with his shiny, shiny eyes. “My troupe is right behind me and they are very hungry. Where is the
roast beef?”
“We didn’t make roast beef,” Violet said. “We made puttanesca sauce.”
“What?” Count Olaf asked. “No roast beef?”
“You didn’t tell us you wanted roast beef,” Klaus said.
Count Olaf slid toward the children so that he looked even taller than he was. His eyes grew even
brighter, and his one eyebrow raised in anger. “In agreeing to adopt you,” he said, “I have become your
father, and as your father I amnot someone to be trifled with. I demand that you serve roast beef to myself
and my guests.”
“We don’t have any!” Violet cried. “We made puttanesca sauce!”
“No! No! No!” Sunny shouted.
Count Olaf looked down at Sunny, who had spoken so suddenly. With an inhuman roar he picked her up
in one scraggly hand and raised her so she was staring at himin the eye. Needless to say, Sunny was very
frightened and began crying immediately, too scared to even try to bite the hand that held her.
“Put her down immediately, you beast!”
Klaus shouted. He jumped up, trying to rescue Sunny fromthe grasp of the Count, but he was holding
her too high to reach. Count Olaf looked down at Klaus and smiled a terrible, toothy grin, raising the
wailing Sunny up even higher in the air. He seemed about to drop her to the floor when there was a large
burst of laughter in the next room.
“Olaf! Where’s Olaf?” voices called out. Count Olaf paused, still holding the wailing Sunny up in the
air, as members of his theater troupe walked into the kitchen. Soon they were crowding the room-an
assortment of strange-looking characters of all shapes and sizes. There was a bald man with a very long
nose, dressed in a long black robe. There were two women who had bright white powder all over their
faces, making themlook like ghosts. Behind the women was a man with very long and skinny arms, at the
end of which were two hooks instead of hands. There was a person who was extremely fat, and who
looked like neither a man nor a woman. And behind this person, standing in the doorway, were an
assortment of people the children could not see but who promised to be just as frightening.
“Here you are, Olaf,” said one of the white-faced women. “What in the world are you doing?”
“I’mjust disciplining these orphans,” Count Olaf said. “I asked themto make dinner, and all they have
made is some disgusting sauce.”
“You can’t go easy on children,” the man with the hook-hands said. “They must be taught to obey their
elders.”
The tall, bald man peered at the youngsters. “Are these,” he said to Count Olaf, “those wealthy children
you were telling me about?”
“Yes,” Count Olaf said. “They are so awful I can scarcely stand to touch them.” With that, he lowered
Sunny, who was still wailing, to the floor. Violet and Klaus breathed a sigh of relief that he had not
dropped her fromthat great height.
“I don’t blame you,” said someone in the doorway.
Count Olaf rubbed his hands together as if he had been holding something revolting instead of an infant.
“Well, enough talk,” he said. “I suppose we will eat their dinner, even though it is all wrong. Everyone,
follow me to the dining roomand I will pour us some wine. Perhaps by the time these brats serve us, we
will be too drunk to care if it is roast beef or not.”
“Hurrah!” cried several members of the troupe, and they marched through the kitchen, following Count
Olaf into the dining room. Nobody paid a bit of attention to the children, except for the bald man, who
stopped and stared Violet in the eye.
“You’re a pretty one,” he said, taking her face in his rough hands. “If I were you I would try not to
anger Count Olaf, or he might wreck that pretty little face of yours.” Violet shuddered, and the bald man
gave a high-pitched giggle and left the room.
The Baudelaire children, alone in the kitchen, found themselves breathing heavily, as if they had just
run a long distance. Sunny continued to wail, and Klaus found that his eyes were wet with tears as well.
Only Violet didn’t cry, but merely trembled with fear and revulsion, a word which here means “an
unpleasant mixture of horror and disgust.” For several moments none of themcould speak.
“This is terrible, terrible,” Klaus said finally. “Violet, what can we do?”
“I don’t know,” she said. “I’mafraid.”
“Me too,” Klaus said.
“Hux!” Sunny said, as she stopped crying.
“Let’s have some dinner!” someone shouted fromthe dining room, and the theater troupe began
pounding on the table in strict rhythm, which is an exceedingly rude thing to do.
“We’d better serve the puttanesca,” Klaus said, “or who knows what Count Olaf will do to us.”
Violet thought of what the bald man had said, about wrecking her face, and nodded. The two of them
looked at the pot of bubbling sauce, which had seemed so cozy while they were making it and now looked
like a vat of blood. Then, leaving Sunny behind in the kitchen, they walked into the dining room, Klaus
carrying a bowl of the interestingly shaped noodles and Violet carrying the pot of puttanesca sauce and a
large ladle with which to serve it. The theater troupe was talking and cackling, drinking again and again
fromtheir wine cups and paying no attention to the Baudelaire orphans as they circled the table serving
everyone dinner. Violet’s right hand ached fromholding the heavy ladle. She thought of switching to her
left hand, but because she was right-handed she was afraid she might spill the sauce with her left hand,
which could enrage Count Olaf again. She stared miserably at Olaf’s plate of food and found herself
wishing she had bought poison at the market and put it in the puttanesca sauce. Finally, they were through
serving, and Klaus and Violet slipped back into the kitchen. They listened to the wild, rough laughter of
Count Olaf and his theater troupe, and they picked at their own portions of food, too miserable to eat.
Before long, Olaf’s friends were pounding on the table in strict rhythmagain, and the orphans went out to
the dining roomto clear the table, and then again to serve the chocolate pudding. By now it was obvious
that Count Olaf and his associates had drunk a great deal of wine, and they slouched at the table and spoke
much less. Finally, they roused themselves, and trooped back through the kitchen, scarcely glancing at the
children on their way out of the house. Count Olaf looked around the room, which was filled with dirty
dishes.
“Because you haven’t cleaned up yet,” he said to the orphans, “I suppose you can be excused from
attending tonight’s performance. But after cleaning up, you are to go straight to your beds.”
Klaus had been glaring at the floor, trying to hide how upset he was. But at this he could not remain
silent. “You mean our bed!” he shouted. “You have only provided us with one bed!”
Members of the theater troupe stopped in their tracks at this outburst, and glanced fromKlaus to Count
Olaf to see what would happen next. Count Olaf raised his one eyebrow, and his eyes shone bright, but he
spoke calmly.
“If you would like another bed,” he said, “tomorrow you may go into town and purchase one.”
“You know perfectly well we haven’t any money,” Klaus said.
“Of course you do,” Count Olaf said, and his voice began to get a little louder. “You are the inheritors
of an enormous fortune.”
“That money,” Klaus said, remembering what Mr. Poe said, “is not to be used until Violet is of age.”
Count Olaf’s face grew very red. For a moment he said nothing. Then, in one sudden movement, he
reached down and struck Klaus across the face. Klaus fell to the floor, his face inches fromthe eye
tattooed on Olaf’s ankle. His glasses leaped fromhis face and skittered into a corner. His left cheek,
where Olaf had struck him, felt as if it were on fire. The theater troupe laughed, and a few of them
applauded as if Count Olaf had done something very brave instead of something despicable.
“Come on, friends,” Count Olaf said to his comrades. “We’ll be late for our own performance.”
“If I know you, Olaf,” said the man with the hook-hands, “you’ll figure out a way to get at that
Baudelaire money.”
“We’ll see,” Count Olaf said, but his eyes were shining bright as if he already had an idea. There was
another loud boomas the front door shut behind Count Olaf and his terrible friends, and the Baudelaire
children were alone in the kitchen. Violet knelt at Klaus’s side, giving hima hug to try to make himfeel
better. Sunny crawled over to his glasses, picked themup, and brought themto him. Klaus began to sob,
not so much fromthe pain but fromrage at the terrible situation they were in. Violet and Sunny cried with
him, and they continued weeping as they washed the dishes, and as they blew out the candles in the dining
room, and as they changed out of their clothes and lay down to go to sleep, Klaus in the bed, Violet on the
floor, Sunny on her little cushion of curtains. The moonlight shone through the window, and if anyone had
looked into the Baudelaire orphans’ bedroom, they would have seen three children crying quietly all night
long.
Chapter
Five
Unless you have been very, very lucky, you have undoubtedly experienced events in your life that have
made you cry. So unless you have been very, very lucky, you know that a good, long session of weeping
can often make you feel better, even if your circumstances have not changed one bit. So it was with the
Baudelaire orphans. Having cried all night, they rose the next morning feeling as if a weight were off their
shoulders. The three children knew, of course, that they were still in a terrible situation, but they thought
they might do something to make it better.
The morning’s note fromCount Olaf ordered themto chop firewood in the backyard, and as Violet and
Klaus swung the axe down over each log to break it into smaller pieces, they discussed possible plans of
action, while Sunny chewed meditatively on a small piece of wood.
“Clearly,” Klaus said, fingering the ugly bruise on his face where Olaf had struck him, “we cannot stay
here any longer. I would rather take my chances on the streets than live in this terrible place.”
“But who knows what misfortunes would befall us on the streets?” Violet pointed out. “At least here
we have a roof over our heads.”
“I wish our parents’ money could be used now, instead of when you come of age,” Klaus said. “Then
we could buy a castle and live in it, with armed guards patrolling the outside to keep out Count Olaf and
his troupe.”
“And I could have a large inventing studio,” Violet said wistfully. She swung the axe down and split a
log neatly in two. “Filled with gears and pulleys and wires and an elaborate computer system.”
“And I could have a large library,” Klaus said, “as comfortable as Justice Strauss’s, but more
enormous.”
“Gibbo!” Sunny shrieked, which appeared to mean “And I could have lots of things to bite.”
“But in the meantime,” Violet said, “we have to do something about our predicament.”
“Perhaps Justice Strauss could adopt us,” Klaus said. “She said we were always welcome in her
home.”
“But she meant for a visit, or to use her library,” Violet pointed out. “She didn’t mean to live.”
“Perhaps if we explained our situation to her, she would agree to adopt us,” Klaus said hopefully, but
when Violet looked at himshe saw that he knew it was of no use. Adoption is an enormous decision, and
not likely to happen impulsively. I’msure you, in your life, have occasionally wished to be raised by
different people than the ones who are raising you, but knew in your heart that the chances of this were
very slim.
“I think we should go see Mr. Poe,” Violet said. “He told us when he dropped us here that we could
contact himat the bank if we had any questions.”
“We don’t really have a question,” Klaus said. “We have a complaint.” He was thinking of Mr. Poe
walking toward themat Briny Beach, with his terrible message. Even though the fire was of course not
Mr. Poe’s fault, Klaus was reluctant to see Mr. Poe because he was afraid of getting more bad news.
“I can’t think of anyone else to contact,” Violet said. “Mr. Poe is in charge of our affairs, and I’msure
if he knew how horrid Count Olaf is, he would take us right out of here.”
Klaus pictured Mr. Poe arriving in his car and putting the Baudelaire orphans inside, to go somewhere
else, and felt a stirring of hope. Anywhere would be better than here.
“Okay,” he said. “Let’s get this firewood all chopped and we’ll go to the bank.”
Invigorated by their plan, the Baudelaire orphans swung their axes at an amazing speed, and soon
enough they were done chopping firewood and ready to go to the bank. They remembered Count Olaf
saying he had a map of the city, and they looked thoroughly for it, but they couldn’t find any trace of a
map, and decided it must be in the tower, where they were forbidden to go. So, without directions of any
sort, the Baudelaire children set off for the city’s banking district in hopes of finding Mr. Poe.
After walking through the meat district, the flower district, and the sculpture district, the three children
arrived at the banking district, pausing to take a refreshing sip of water at the Fountain of Victorious
Finance. The banking district consisted of several wide streets with large marble buildings on each side
of them, all banks. They went first to Trustworthy Bank, and then to Faithful Savings and Loan, and then to
Subservient Financial Services, each time inquiring for Mr. Poe. Finally, a receptionist at Subservient
said she knew that Mr. Poe worked down the street, at Mulctuary Money Management. The building was
square and rather plain-looking, though once inside, the three orphans were intimidated by the hustle and
bustle of the people as they raced around the large, echoey room. Finally, they asked a uniformed guard
whether they had arrived at the right place to speak to Mr. Poe, and he led theminto a large office with
many file cabinets and no windows.
“Why, hello,” said Mr. Poe, in a puzzled tone of voice. He was sitting at a desk covered in typed
papers that looked important and boring. Surrounding a small framed photograph of his wife and his two
beastly sons were three telephones with flashing lights. “Please come in.”
“Thank you,” said Klaus, shaking Mr. Poe’s hand. The Baudelaire youngsters sat down in three large
and comfortable chairs.
Mr. Poe opened his mouth to speak, but had to cough into a handkerchief before he could begin. “I’m
very busy today,” he said finally. “So I don’t have too much time to chat. Next time you should call ahead
of time when you plan on being in the neighborhood, and I will put some time aside to take you to lunch.”
“That would be very pleasant,” Violet said, “and we’re sorry we didn’t contact you before we stopped
by, but we find ourselves in an urgent situation.”
“Count Olaf is a madman,” Klaus said, getting right to the point. “We cannot stay with him.”
“He struck Klaus across the face. See his bruise?” Violet said, but just as she said it, one of the
telephones rang, in a loud, unpleasant wail. “Excuse me,” Mr. Poe said, and picked up the phone. “Poe
here,” he said into the receiver. “What? Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. No. Yes. Thank you.” He hung up the phone
and looked at the Baudelaires as if he had forgotten they were there.
“I’msorry,” Mr. Poe said, “what were we talking about? Oh, yes, Count Olaf. I’msorry you don’t have
a good first impression of him.”
“He has only provided us with one bed,” Klaus said.
“He makes us do a great many difficult chores.”
“He drinks too much wine.”
“Excuse me,” Mr. Poe said, as another telephone rang. “Poe here,” he said. “Seven. Seven. Seven.
Seven. Six and a half. Seven. You’re welcome.” He hung up and quickly wrote something down on one of
his papers, then looked at the children. “I’msorry,” he said, “what were you saying about Count Olaf?
Making you do chores doesn’t sound too bad.”
“He calls us orphans.”
“He has terrible friends.”
“He is always asking about our money.”
“Poko!” (This was fromSunny.)
Mr. Poe put up his hands to indicate he had heard enough. “Children, children,” he said. “You must
give yourselves time to adjust to your new home. You’ve only been there a few days.”
“We have been there long enough to know Count Olaf is a bad man,” Klaus said.
Mr. Poe sighed, and looked at each of the three children. His face was kind, but it didn’t look like he
really believed what the Baudelaire orphans were saying. “Are you familiar with the Latin term‘in loco
parentis’?” he asked.
Violet and Sunny looked at Klaus. The biggest reader of the three, he was the most likely to know
vocabulary words and foreign phrases. “Something about trains?” he asked. Maybe Mr. Poe was going to
take themby train to another relative.
Mr. Poe shook his head. “ ‘In loco parentis’ means ‘acting in the role of parent,’ ” he said. “It is a legal
termand it applies to Count Olaf. Now that you are in his care, the Count may raise you using any methods
he sees fit. I’msorry if your parents did not make you do any household chores, or if you never saw them
drink any wine, or if you like their friends better than Count Olaf’s friends, but these are things that you
must get used to, as Count Olaf is acting in loco parentis. Understand?”
“But he struck my brother!” Violet said. “Look at his face!”
As Violet spoke, Mr. Poe reached into his pocket for his handkerchief and, covering his mouth,
coughed many, many times into it. He coughed so loudly that Violet could not be certain he had heard her.
“Whatever Count Olaf has done,” Mr. Poe said, glancing down at one of his papers and circling a
number, “he has acted in loco parentis, and there’s nothing I can do about it. Your money will be well
protected by myself and by the bank, but Count Olaf’s parenting techniques are his own business. Now, I
hate to usher you out posthaste, but I have very much work to do.”
The children just sat there, stunned. Mr. Poe looked up, and cleared his throat. “ ‘Posthaste,’ ” he said,
“means-”
“-means you’ll do nothing to help us,” Violet finished for him. She was shaking with anger and
frustration. As one of the phones began ringing, she stood up and walked out of the room, followed by
Klaus, who was carrying Sunny. They stalked out of the bank and stood on the street, not knowing what to
do next.
“What shall we do next?” Klaus asked sadly.
Violet stared up at the sky. She wished she could invent something that could take themout of there.
“It’s getting a bit late,” she said. “We might as well just go back and think of something else tomorrow.
Perhaps we can stop and see Justice Strauss.”
“But you said she wouldn’t help us,” Klaus said.
“Not for help,” Violet said, “for books.”
It is very useful, when one is young, to learn the difference between “literally” and “figuratively.” If
something happens literally, it actually happens; if something happens figuratively, it feels like it’s
happening. If you are literally jumping for joy, for instance, it means you are leaping in the air because
you are very happy. If you are figuratively jumping for joy, it means you are so happy that you could jump
for joy, but are saving your energy for other matters. The Baudelaire orphans walked back to Count Olaf’s
neighborhood and stopped at the home of Justice Strauss, who welcomed theminside and let themchoose
books fromthe library. Violet chose several about mechanical inventions, Klaus chose several about
wolves, and Sunny found a book with many pictures of teeth inside. They then went to their roomand
crowded together on the one bed, reading intently and happily. Figuratively, they escaped fromCount
Olaf and their miserable existence. They did not literally escape, because they were still in his house and
vulnerable to Olaf’s evil in loco parentis ways. But by immersing themselves in their favorite reading
topics, they felt far away fromtheir predicament, as if they had escaped. In the situation of the orphans,
figuratively escaping was not enough, of course, but at the end of a tiring and hopeless day, it would have
to do. Violet, Klaus, and Sunny read their books and, in the back of their minds, hoped that soon their
figurative escape would eventually turn into a literal one.
Chapter
Six
The next morning, when the children stumbled sleepily fromtheir bedroominto the kitchen, rather than a
note fromCount Olaf they found Count Olaf himself.
“Good morning, orphans,” he said. “I have your oatmeal all ready in bowls for you.”
The children took seats at the kitchen table and stared nervously into their oatmeal. If you knew Count
Olaf, and he suddenly served you a meal, wouldn’t you be afraid there was something terrible in it, like
poison or ground glass? But instead, Violet, Klaus, and Sunny found that fresh raspberries had been
sprinkled on top of each of their portions. The Baudelaire orphans hadn’t had raspberries since their
parents died, although they were extremely fond of them.
“Thank you,” Klaus said, carefully, picking up one of the raspberries and examining it. Perhaps these
were poison berries that just looked like delicious ones. Count Olaf, seeing how suspiciously Klaus was
looking at the berries, smiled and plucked a berry out of Sunny’s bowl. Looking at each of the three
youngsters, he popped it into his mouth and ate it.
“Aren’t raspberries delicious?” he asked. “They were my favorite berries when I was your age.”
Violet tried to picture Count Olaf as a youngster, but couldn’t. His shiny eyes, bony hands, and
shadowy smile all seemed to be things only adults possess. Despite her fear of him, however, she took her
spoon in her right hand and began to eat her oatmeal. Count Olaf had eaten some, so it probably wasn’t
poisonous, and anyway she was very hungry. Klaus began to eat, too, as did Sunny, who got oatmeal and
raspberries all over her face.
“I received a phone call yesterday,” Count Olaf said, “from Mr. Poe. He told me you children had been
to see him.”
The children exchanged glances. They had hoped their visit would be taken in confidence, a phrase
which here means “kept a secret between Mr. Poe and themselves and not blabbed to Count Olaf.”
“Mr. Poe told me,” Count Olaf said, “that you appeared to be having some difficulty adjusting to the
life I have so graciously provided for you. I’mvery sorry to hear that.”
The children looked at Count Olaf. His face was very serious, as if he were very sorry to hear that, but
his eyes were shiny and bright, the way they are when someone is telling a joke.
“Is that so?” Violet said. “I’msorry Mr. Poe bothered you.”
“I’mglad he did,” Count Olaf said, “because I want the three of you to feel at home here, now that I am
your father.”
The children shuddered a little at that, remembering their own kind father and gazing sadly at the poor
substitute now sitting across the table fromthem.
“Lately,” Count Olaf said, “I have been very nervous about my performances with the theater troupe,
and I’mafraid I may have acted a bit standoffish.”
The word “standoffish” is a wonderful one, but it does not describe Count Olaf’s behavior toward the
children. It means “reluctant to associate with others,” and it might describe somebody who, during a
party, would stand in a corner and not talk to anyone. It would not describe somebody who provides one
bed for three people to sleep in, forces themto do horrible chores, and strikes themacross the face. There
are many words for people like that, but “standoffish” is not one of them. Klaus knew the word
“standoffish” and almost laughed out loud at Olaf’s incorrect use of it. But his face still had a bruise on it,
so Klaus remained silent.
“Therefore, to make you feel a little more at home here, I would like to have you participate in my next
play. Perhaps if you took part in the work I do, you would be less likely to run off complaining to Mr.
Poe.”
“In what way would we participate?” Violet asked. She was thinking of all the chores they already did
for Count Olaf, and was not in the mood to do more.
“Well,” Count Olaf said, his eyes shining brightly, “the play is called The Marvelous Marriage, and it
is written by the great playwright Al Funcoot. We will give only one performance, on this Friday night. It
is about a man who is very brave and intelligent, played by me. In the finale, he marries the young,
beautiful woman he loves, in front of a crowd of cheering people. You, Klaus, and you, Sunny, will play
some of the cheering people in the crowd.”
“But we’re shorter than most adults,” Klaus said. “Won’t that look strange to the audience?”
“You will be playing two midgets who attend the wedding,” Olaf said patiently.
“And what will I do?” Violet asked. “I amvery handy with tools, so perhaps I could help you build the
set.”
“Build the set? Heavens, no,” Count Olaf said. “A pretty girl like you shouldn’t be working backstage.”
“But I’d like to,” Violet said.
Count Olaf’s one eyebrow raised slightly, and the Baudelaire orphans recognized this sign of his anger.
But then the eyebrow went down again as he forced himself to remain calm. “But I have such an important
role for you onstage,” he said. “You are going to play the young woman I marry.”
Violet felt her oatmeal and raspberries shift around in her stomach as if she had just caught the flu. It
was bad enough having Count Olaf acting in loco parentis and announcing himself as their father, but to
consider this man her husband, even for the purposes of a play, was even more dreadful.
“It’s a very important role,” he continued, his mouth curling up into an unconvincing smile, “although
you have no lines other than ‘I do,’ which you will say when Justice Strauss asks you if you will have
me.”
“Justice Strauss?” Violet said. “What does she have to do with it?”
“She has agreed to play the part of the judge,” Count Olaf said. Behind him, one of the eyes painted on
the kitchen walls closely watched over each of the Baudelaire children. “I asked Justice Strauss to
participate because I wanted to be neighborly, as well as fatherly.”
“Count Olaf,” Violet said, and then stopped herself. She wanted to argue her way out of playing his
bride, but she didn’t want to make himangry. “Father,” she said, “I’mnot sure I’mtalented enough to
performprofessionally. I would hate to disgrace your good name and the name of Al Funcoot. Plus I’ll be
very busy in the next few weeks working on my inventions-and learning how to prepare roast beef,” she
added quickly, remembering how he had behaved about dinner.
Count Olaf reached out one of his spidery hands and stroked Violet on the chin, looking deep into her
eyes. “You will,” he said, “participate in this theatrical performance. I would prefer it if you would
participate voluntarily, but as I believe Mr. Poe explained to you, I can order you to participate and you
must obey.” Olaf’s sharp and dirty fingernails gently scratched on Violet’s chin, and she shivered. The
roomwas very, very quiet as Olaf finally let go, and stood up and left without a word. The Baudelaire
children listened to his heavy footsteps go up the stairs to the tower they were forbidden to enter.
“Well,” Klaus said hesitantly, “I guess it won’t hurt to be in the play. It seems to be very important to
him, and we want to keep on his good side.”
“But he must be up to something,” Violet said.
“You don’t think those berries were poisoned, do you?” Klaus asked worriedly.
“No,” Violet said. “Olaf is after the fortune we will inherit. Killing us would do himno good.”
“But what good does it do himto have us be in his stupid play?”
“I don’t know,” Violet admitted miserably. She stood up and started washing out the oatmeal bowls.
“I wish we knew something more about inheritance law,” Klaus said. “I’ll bet Count Olaf has cooked
up some plan to get our money, but I don’t know what it could be.”
“I guess we could ask Mr. Poe about it,” Violet said doubtfully, as Klaus stood beside her and dried
the dishes. “He knows all those Latin legal phrases.”
“But Mr. Poe would probably call Count Olaf again, and then he’d know we were on to him,” Klaus
pointed out. “Maybe we should try to talk to Justice Strauss. She’s a judge, so she must know all about the
law.”
“But she’s also Olaf’s neighbor,” Violet replied, “and she might tell himthat we had asked.”
Klaus took his glasses off, which he often did when he was thinking hard. “How could we find out
about the law without Olaf’s knowledge?”
“Book!” Sunny shouted suddenly. She probably meant something like “Would somebody please wipe
my face?” but it made Violet and Klaus look at each other. Book. They were both thinking the same thing:
Surely Justice Strauss would have a book on inheritance law.
“Count Olaf didn’t leave us any chores to do,” Violet said, “so I suppose we are free to visit Justice
Strauss and her library.”
Klaus smiled. “Yes indeed,” he said. “And you know, today I don’t think I’ll choose a book on
wolves.”
“Nor I,” Violet said, “on mechanical engineering. I think I’d like to read about inheritance law”
“Well, let’s go,” Klaus said. “Justice Strauss said we could come over soon, and we don’t want to be
standof ish.”
At the mention of the word that Count Olaf had used so ridiculously, the Baudelaire orphans all
laughed, even Sunny, who of course did not have a very big vocabulary. Swiftly they put away the clean
oatmeal bowls in the kitchen cupboards, which watched themwith painted eyes. Then the three young
people ran next door. Friday, the day of the performance, was only a few days off, and the children
wanted to figure out Count Olaf’s plan as quickly as possible.
Chapter
Seven
There are many, many types of books in the world, which makes good sense, because there are many,
many types of people, and everybody wants to read something different. For instance, people who hate
stories in which terrible things happen to small children should put this book down immediately. But one
type of book that practically no one likes to read is a book about the law. Books about the law are
notorious for being very long, very dull, and very difficult to read. This is one reason many lawyers make
heaps of money. The money is an incentive-the word “incentive” here means “an offered reward to
persuade you to do something you don’t want to do”-to read long, dull, and difficult books.
The Baudelaire children had a slightly different incentive for reading these books, of course. Their
incentive was not heaps of money, but preventing Count Olaf fromdoing something horrible to themin
order to get heaps of money. But even with this incentive, getting through the law books in Justice
Strauss’s private library was a very, very, very hard task.
“Goodness,” Justice Strauss said, when she came into the library and saw what they were reading. She
had let themin the house but immediately went into the backyard to do her gardening, leaving the
Baudelaire orphans alone in her glorious library. “I thought you were interested in mechanical
engineering, animals of North America, and teeth. Are you sure you want to read those enormous law
books? Even I don’t like reading them, and I work in law.”
“Yes,” Violet lied, “I find themvery interesting, Justice Strauss.”
“So do I,” Klaus said. “Violet and I are considering a career in law, so we are fascinated by these
books.”
“Well,” Justice Strauss said, “Sunny can’t possibly be interested. Maybe she’d like to come help me
with the gardening.”
“Wipi!” Sunny shrieked, which meant “I’d much prefer gardening to sitting around watching my
siblings struggle through law books.”
“Well, make sure she doesn’t eat any dirt,” Klaus said, bringing Sunny over to the judge.
“Of course,” said Justice Strauss. “We wouldn’t want her to be sick for the big performance.”
Violet and Klaus exchanged a look. “Are you excited about the play?” Violet asked hesitantly.
Justice Strauss’s face lit up. “Oh yes,” she said. “I’ve always wanted to performonstage, ever since I
was a little girl. And now Count Olaf has given me the opportunity to live my lifelong dream. Aren’t you
thrilled to be a part of the theater?”
“I guess so,” Violet said.
“Of course you are,” Judge Strauss said, stars in her eyes and Sunny in her hands. She left the library
and Klaus and Violet looked at each other and sighed.
“She’s stagestruck,” Klaus said. “She won’t believe that Count Olaf is up to something, no matter
what.”
“She wouldn’t help us anyway,” Violet pointed out glumly. “She’s a judge, and she’d just start babbling
about in loco parentis like Mr. Poe.”
“That’s why we’ve got to find a legal reason to stop the performance,” Klaus said firmly. “Have you
found anything in your book yet?”
“Nothing helpful,” Violet said, glancing down at a piece of scrap paper on which she had been taking
notes. “Fifty years ago there was a woman who left an enormous sumof money to her pet weasel, and
none to her three sons. The three sons tried to prove that the woman was insane so the money would go to
them.”
“What happened?” Klaus asked.
“I think the weasel died,” Violet replied, “but I’mnot sure. I have to look up some of the words.”
“I don’t think it’s going to help us anyway,” Klaus said.
“Maybe Count Olaf is trying to prove that we’re insane, so he’d get the money,” Violet said.
“But why would making us be in The Marvelous Marriage prove we were insane?” Klaus asked.
“I don’t know,” Violet admitted. “I’mstuck. Have you found anything?”
“Around the time of your weasel lady,” Klaus said, flipping through the enormous book he had been
reading, “a group of actors put on a production of Shakespeare’s Macbeth, and none of themwore any
clothing.”
Violet blushed. “You mean they were all naked, onstage?”
“Only briefly,” Klaus said, smiling. “The police came and shut down the production. I don’t think that’s
very helpful, either. It was just pretty interesting to read about.”
Violet sighed. “Maybe Count Olaf isn’t up to anything,” she said. “I’mnot interested in performing in
his play, but perhaps we’re all worked up about nothing. Maybe Count Olaf really is just trying to
welcome us into the family.”
“How can you say that?” Klaus cried. “He struck me across the face.”
“But there’s no way he can get hold of our fortune just by putting us in a play,” Violet said. “My eyes
are tired fromreading these books, Klaus, and they aren’t helping us. I’mgoing to go out and help Justice
Strauss in the garden.”
Klaus watched his sister leave the library and felt a wave of hopelessness wash over him. The day of
the performance was not far off, and he hadn’t even figured out what Count Olaf was up to, let alone how
to stop him. All his life, Klaus had believed that if you read enough books you could solve any problem,
but now he wasn’t so sure.
“You there!” A voice coming fromthe doorway startled Klaus out of his thoughts. “Count Olaf sent me
to look for you. You are to return to the house immediately.”
Klaus turned and saw one of the members of Count Olaf’s theater troupe, the one with hooks for hands,
standing in the doorway. “What are you doing in this musty old room, anyway?” he asked in his croak of a
voice, walking over to where Klaus was sitting. Narrowing his beady eyes, he read the title of one of the
books. “Inheritance Law and Its Implications?” he said sharply. “Why are you reading that?”
“Why do you think I’mreading it?” Klaus said.
“I’ll tell you what I think.” The man put one of his terrible hooks on Klaus’s shoulder. “I think you
should never be allowed inside this library again, at least until Friday. We don’t want a little boy getting
big ideas. Now, where is your sister and that hideous baby?”
“In the garden,” Klaus said, shrugging the hook off of his shoulder. “Why don’t you go and get them?”
The man leaned over until his face was just inches fromKlaus’s, so close that the man’s features
flickered into a blur. “Listen to me very carefully, little boy,” he said, breathing out foul steamwith every
word. “The only reason Count Olaf hasn’t torn you limb fromlimb is that he hasn’t gotten hold of your
money. He allows you to live while he works out his plans. But ask yourself this, you little bookworm:
What reason will he have to keep you alive after he has your money? What do you think will happen to
you then?”
Klaus felt an icy chill go through himas the horrible man spoke. He had never been so terrified in all
his life. He found that his arms and legs were shaking uncontrollably, as if he were having some sort of
fit. His mouth was making strange sounds, like Sunny always did, as he struggled to find something to say.
“Ah-”
Klaus heard himself choke out. “Ah-”
“When the time comes,” the hook-handed man said smoothly, ignoring Klaus’s noises, “I believe Count
Olaf just might leave you to me. So if I were you, I’d start acting a little nicer.”
The man stood up again and put both his hooks in front of Klaus’s face, letting the light fromthe reading
lamps reflect off the wicked-looking devices.
“Now, if you will excuse me, I have to fetch your poor orphan siblings.”
Klaus felt his body go limp as the hook-handed man left the room, and he wanted to sit there for a
moment and catch his breath. But his mind wouldn’t let him. This was his last moment in the library, and
perhaps his last opportunity to foil Count Olaf’s plan. But what to do? Hearing the faint sounds of the
hook-handed man talking to Justice Strauss in the garden, Klaus looked frantically around the library for
something that could be helpful.
Then, just as he heard the man’s footsteps heading back his way, Klaus spied one book, and quickly
grabbed it. He untucked his shirt and put the book inside, hastily retucking it just as the hook-handed man
reentered the library, escorting Violet and carrying Sunny, who was trying without success to bite the
man’s hooks.
“I’mready to go,” Klaus said quickly, and walked out the door before the man could get a good look at
him. He walked quickly ahead of his siblings, hoping that nobody would notice the book-shaped lump in
his shirt. Maybe, just maybe, the book Klaus was smuggling could save their lives.
Chapter
Eight
Klaus stayed up all night reading, which was normally something he loved to do. Back when his parents
were alive, Klaus used to take a flashlight to bed with himand hide under the covers, reading until he
couldn’t keep his eyes open. Some mornings, his father would come into Klaus’s roomto wake himup
and find himasleep, still clutching his flashlight in one hand and his book in the other. But on this
particular night, of course, the circumstances were much different.
Klaus stood by the window, squinting as he read his smuggled book by the moonlight that trickled into
the room. He occasionally glanced at his sisters. Violet was sleeping fitfully-a word which here means
“with much tossing and turning”-on the lumpy bed, and Sunny had wormed her way into the pile of
curtains so that she just looked like a small heap of cloth. Klaus had not told his siblings about the book,
because he didn’t want to give themfalse hope. He wasn’t sure the book would help themout of their
dilemma.
The book was long, and difficult to read, and Klaus became more and more tired as the night wore on.
Occasionally his eyes would close. He found himself reading the same sentence over and over. He found
himself reading the same sentence over and over. He found himself reading the same sentence over and
over. But then he would remember the way the hook-hands of Count Olaf’s associate had glinted in the
library, and would imagine themtearing into his flesh, and he would wake right up and continue reading.
He found a small scrap of paper and tore it into strips, which he used to mark significant parts of the
book.
By the time the light outside grew gray with the approaching dawn, Klaus had found out all he needed
to know. His hopes rose along with the sun. Finally, when the first few birds began to sing, Klaus tiptoed
to the door of the bedroomand eased it open quietly, careful not to wake the restless Violet or Sunny, who
was still hidden in the pile of curtains. Then he went to the kitchen and sat and waited for Count Olaf.
He didn’t have to wait long before he heard Olaf tromping down the tower stairs. When Count Olaf
walked into the kitchen, he saw Klaus sitting at the table and smirked, a word which here means “smiled
in an unfriendly, phony way.”
“Hello, orphan,” he said. “You’re up early.”
Klaus’s heart was beating fast, but he felt calmon the outside, as if he had on a layer of invisible
armor. “I’ve been up all night,” he said, “reading this book.” He put the book out on the table so Olaf
could see it. “It’s called Nuptial Law,” Klaus said, “and I learned many interesting things while reading
it.”
Count Olaf had taken out a bottle of wine to pour himself some breakfast, but when he saw the book he
stopped, and sat down.
“The word ‘nuptial,’ ” Klaus said, “means ‘relating to marriage.’ ”
“I know what the word means,” Count Olaf growled. “Where did you get that book?”
“FromJustice Strauss’s library,” Klaus said. “But that’s not important. What’s important is that I have
found out your plan.”
“Is that so?” Count Olaf said, his one eyebrow raising. “And what is my plan, you little runt?”
Klaus ignored the insult and opened the book to where one of the scraps of paper was marking his
place. “ ‘The laws of marriage in this community are very simple,’ ” he read out loud.
“ ‘The requirements are as follows: the presence of a judge, a statement of “I do” by both the bride and
the groom, and the signing of an explanatory document in the bride’s own hand.’ ” Klaus put down the
book and pointed at Count Olaf. “If my sister says ‘I do’ and signs a piece of paper, while Justice Strauss
is in the room, then she is legally married. This play you’re putting on shouldn’t be called The Marvelous
Marriage. It should be called The Menacing Marriage. You’re not going to marry Violet figurativelyyou’re
going to marry her literally! This play won’t be pretend; it will be real and legally binding.”
Count Olaf laughed a rough, hoarse laugh. “Your sister isn’t old enough to get married.”
“She can get married if she has the permission of her legal guardian, acting in loco parentis,” Klaus
said. “I read that, too. You can’t fool me.”
“Why in the world would I want to actually marry your sister?” Count Olaf asked. “It is true she is very
pretty, but a man like myself can acquire any number of beautiful women.”
Klaus turned to a different section of Nuptial Law, “ ‘A legal husband,’ ” he read out loud, “ ‘has the
right to control any money in the possession of his legal wife.’ ” Klaus gazed at Count Olaf in triumph.
“You’re going to marry my sister to gain control of the Baudelaire fortune! Or at least, that’s what you
planned to do. But when I show this information to Mr. Poe, your play will not be performed, and you
will go to jail!”
Count Olaf’s eyes grew very shiny, but he continued to smirk at Klaus. This was surprising. Klaus had
guessed that once he announced what he knew, this dreadful man would have been very angry, even
violent. After all, he’d had a furious outburst just because he’d wanted roast beef instead of puttanesca
sauce. Surely he’d be even more enraged to have his plan discovered. But Count Olaf just sat there as
calmly as if they were discussing the weather.
“I guess you’ve found me out,” Olaf said simply. “I suppose you’re right: I’ll go to prison, and you and
the other orphans will go free. Now, why don’t you run up to your roomand wake your sisters? I’msure
they’ll want to know all about your grand victory over my evil ways.”
Klaus looked closely at Count Olaf, who was continuing to smile as if he had just told a clever joke.
Why wasn’t he threatening Klaus in anger, or tearing his hair out in frustration, or running to pack his
clothes and escape? This wasn’t happening at all the way Klaus had pictured it.
“Well, I will go tell my sisters,” he said, and walked back into his bedroom. Violet was still dozing on
the bed and Sunny was still hidden beneath the curtains. Klaus woke Violet up first.
“I stayed up all night reading,” Klaus said breathlessly, as his sister opened her eyes, “and I discovered
what Count Olaf is up to. He plans to marry you for real, when you and Justice Strauss and everyone all
think it’s just a play, and once he’s your husband he’ll have control of our parents’ money and he can
dispose of us.”
“How can he marry me for real?” Violet asked. “It’s only a play.”
“The only legal requirements of marriage in this community,” Klaus explained, holding up Nuptial Law
to show his sister where he’d learned the information, “are your saying ‘I do,’ and signing a document in
your own hand in the presence of a judge-like Justice Strauss!”
“But surely I’mnot old enough to get married,” Violet said. “I’monly fourteen.”
“Girls under the age of eighteen,” Klaus said, flipping to another part of the book, “can marry if they
have the permission of their legal guardian. That’s Count Olaf.”
“Oh no!” Violet cried. “What can we do?”
“We can show this to Mr. Poe,” Klaus said, pointing to the book, “and he will finally believe us that
Count Olaf is up to no good. Quick, get dressed while I wake up Sunny, and we can be at the bank by the
time it opens.”
Violet, who usually moved slowly in the mornings, nodded and immediately got out of bed and went to
the cardboard box to find some proper clothing. Klaus walked over to the lump of curtains to wake up his
younger sister.
“Sunny,” he called out kindly, putting his hand on where he thought his sister’s head was. “Sunny.”
There was no answer. Klaus called out “Sunny” again, and pulled away the top fold of the curtains to
wake up the youngest Baudelaire child. “Sunny,” he said, but then he stopped. For underneath the curtain
was nothing but another curtain. He moved aside all the layers, but his little sister was nowhere to be
found. “Sunny!” he yelled, looking around the room. Violet dropped the dress she was holding and began
to help himsearch. They looked in every corner, under the bed, and even inside the cardboard box. But
Sunny was gone.
“Where can she be?” Violet asked worriedly. “She’s not the type to run off.”
“Where can she be indeed?” said a voice behind them, and the two children turned around. Count Olaf
was standing in the doorway, watching Violet and Klaus as they searched the room. His eyes were shining
brighter than they ever had, and he was still smiling like he’d just uttered a joke.
Chapter
Nine
“Yes,” Count Olaf continued, “it certainly is strange to find a child missing. And one so small, and
helpless.”
“Where’s Sunny?” Violet cried. “What have you done with her?”
Count Olaf continued to speak as if he had not heard Violet. “But then again, one sees strange things
every day. In fact, if you two orphans follow me out to the backyard, I think we will all see something
rather unusual.”
The Baudelaire children didn’t say anything, but followed Count Olaf through the house and out the
back door. Violet looked around the small, scraggly yard, in which she had not been since she and Klaus
had been forced to chop wood. The pile of logs they had made was still lying there untouched, as if Count
Olaf had merely made themchop logs for his own amusement, rather than for any purpose. Violet
shivered, still in her nightgown, but as she gazed here and there she saw nothing unusual.
“You’re not looking in the right place,” Count Olaf said. “For children who read so much, you two are
remarkably unintelligent.”
Violet looked over in the direction of Count Olaf, but could not meet his eyes. The eyes on his face, that
is. She was staring at his feet, and could see the tattooed eye that had been watching the Baudelaire
orphans since their troubles had begun. Then her eyes traveled up Count Olaf’s lean, shabbily dressed
body, and she saw that he was pointing up with one scrawny hand. She followed his gesture and found
herself looking at the forbidden tower. It was made of dirty stone, with only one lone window, and just
barely visible in the window was what looked like a birdcage.
“Oh no,” Klaus said in a small, scared voice, and Violet looked again. It was a birdcage, dangling from
the tower window like a flag in the wind, but inside the birdcage she could see a small and frightened
Sunny. When Violet looked closely, she could see there was a large piece of tape across her sister’s
mouth, and ropes around her body. She was utterly trapped.
“Let her go!” Violet said to Count Olaf. “She has done nothing to you! She is an infant!”
“Well, now,” Count Olaf said, sitting on a stump. “If you really want me to let her go, I will. But surely
even a stupid brat like you might realize that if I let her go-or, more accurately, if I ask my comrade to let
her go-poor little Sunny might not survive the fall down to the ground. That’s a thirty-foot tower, which is
a very long way for a very little person to fall, even when she’s inside a cage. But if you insist-”
“No!” Klaus cried. “Don’t!”
Violet looked into Count Olaf’s eyes, and then at the small parcel that was her sister, hanging fromthe
top of the tower and moving slowly in the breeze. She pictured Sunny toppling fromthe tower and onto
the ground, pictured her sister’s last thoughts being ones of sheer terror. “Please,” she said to Olaf,
feeling tears in her eyes. “She’s just a baby. We’ll do anything, anything, just don’t harmher.”
“Anything?” Count Olaf asked, his eyebrow rising. He leaned in toward Violet and gazed into her
eyes. “Anything? Would you, for instance, consider marrying me during tomorrow night’s performance?”
Violet stared at him. She had an odd feeling in her stomach, as if she were the one being thrown froma
great height. The really frightening thing about Olaf, she realized, was that he was very smart after all. He
wasn’t merely an unsavory drunken brute, but an unsavory, clever drunken brute.
“While you were busy reading books and making accusations,” Count Olaf said, “I had one of my
quietest, sneakiest assistants skulk into your bedroomand steal little Sunny away. She is perfectly safe,
for now. But I consider her to be a stick behind a stubborn mule.”
“Our sister is not a stick,” Klaus said.
“A stubborn mule,” Count Olaf explained, “does not move in the direction its owner wants it to. In that
way, it is like you children, who insist on mucking up my plans. Any animal owner will tell you that a
stubborn mule will move in the proper direction if there is a carrot in front of it, and a stick behind it. It
will move toward the carrot, because it wants the reward of food, and away fromthe stick, because it
does not want the punishment of pain. Likewise, you will do what I say, to avoid the punishment of the
loss of your sister, and because you want the reward of surviving this experience. Now, Violet, let me ask
you again: will you marry me?”
Violet swallowed, and looked down at Count Olaf’s tattoo. She could not bring herself to answer.
“Come now,” Count Olaf said, his voice faking-a word which here means “feigning”-kindness. He
reached out a hand and stroked Violet’s hair. “Would it be so terrible to be my bride, to live in my house
for the rest of your life? You’re such a lovely girl, after the marriage I wouldn’t dispose of you like your
brother and sister.”
Violet imagined sleeping beside Count Olaf, and waking up each morning to look at this terrible man.
She pictured wandering around the house, trying to avoid himall day, and cooking for his terrible friends
at night, perhaps every night, for the rest of her life. But then she looked up at her helpless sister and knew
what her answer must be. “If you let Sunny go,” she said finally, “I will marry you.”
“I will let Sunny go,” Count Olaf answered, “after tomorrow night’s performance. In the meantime, she
will remain in the tower for safekeeping. And, as a warning, I will tell you that my assistants will stand
guard at the door to the tower staircase, in case you were getting any ideas.”
“You’re a terrible man,” Klaus spat out, but Count Olaf merely smiled again.
“I may be a terrible man,” Count Olaf said, “but I have been able to concoct a foolproof way of getting
your fortune, which is more than you’ve been able to do.” With that, he began to stride toward the house.
“Remember that, orphans,” he said. “You may have read more books than I have, but it didn’t help you
gain the upper hand in this situation. Now, give me that book which gave you such grand ideas, and do the
chores assigned to you.”
Klaus sighed, and relinquished-a word which here means “gave to Count Olaf even though he didn’t
want to”-the book on nuptial law. He began to follow Count Olaf into the house, but Violet stayed still as
a statue. She hadn’t been listening to that last speech of Count Olaf’s, knowing it would be full of the
usual self-congratulatory nonsense and despicable insults. She was staring at the tower, not at the top,
where her sister was dangling, but the whole length of it. Klaus looked back at her and saw something he
hadn’t seen in quite some time. To those who hadn’t been around Violet long, nothing would have seemed
unusual, but those who knew her well knew that when she tied her hair up in a ribbon to keep it out of her
eyes, it meant that the gears and levers of her inventing brain were whirring at top speed.
Chapter
Ten
That night, Klaus was the Baudelaire orphan sleeping fitfully in the bed, and Violet was the Baudelaire
orphan staying up, working by the light of the moon. All day, the two siblings had wandered around the
house, doing the assigned chores and scarcely speaking to each other. Klaus was too tired and despondent
to speak, and Violet was holed up in the inventing area of her mind, too busy planning to talk.
When night approached, Violet gathered up the curtains that had been Sunny’s bed and brought themto
the door to the tower stairs, where the enormous assistant of Count Olaf’s, the one who looked like
neither a man nor a woman, was standing guard. Violet asked whether she could bring the blankets to her
sister, to make her more comfortable during the night. The enormous creature merely looked at Violet with
its blank white eyes and shook its head, then dismissed her with a silent gesture.
Violet knew, of course, that Sunny was too terrified to be comforted by a handful of draperies, but she
hoped that she would be allowed a few moments to hold her and tell her that everything would turn out all
right. Also, she wanted to do something known in the crime industry as “casing the joint.” “Casing the
joint” means observing a particular location in order to formulate a plan. For instance, if you are a bank
robber-although I hope you aren’t-you might go to the bank a few days before you planned to rob it.
Perhaps wearing a disguise, you would look around the bank and observe security guards, cameras, and
other obstacles, so you could plan how to avoid capture or death during your burglary.
Violet, a law-abiding citizen, was not planning to rob a bank, but she was planning to rescue Sunny,
and was hoping to catch a glimpse of the tower roomin which her sister was being held prisoner, so as to
make her plan more easily. But it appeared that she wasn’t going to be able to case the joint after all. This
made Violet nervous as she sat on the floor by the window, working on her invention as quietly as she
could.
Violet had very few materials with which to invent something, and she didn’t want to wander around
the house looking for more for fear of arousing the suspicions of Count Olaf and his troupe. But she had
enough to build a rescuing device. Above the window was a sturdy metal rod fromwhich the curtains had
hung, and Violet took it down. Using one of the rocks Olaf had left in a pile in the corner, she broke the
curtain rod into two pieces. She then bent each piece of the rod into several sharp angles, leaving tiny cuts
on her hands as she did so. Then Violet took down the painting of the eye. On the back of the painting, as
on the back of many paintings, was a small piece of wire to hang on the hook. She removed the wire and
used it to connect the two pieces together. Violet had now made what looked like a large metal spider.
She then went over to the cardboard box and took out the ugliest of the clothes that Mrs. Poe had
purchased, the outfits the Baudelaire orphans would never wear no matter how desperate they were.
Working quickly and quietly, she began to tear these into long, narrow strips, and to tie these strips
together. Among Violet’s many useful skills was a vast knowledge of different types of knots. The
particular knot she was using was called the Devil’s Tongue. A group of female Finnish pirates invented
it back in the fifteenth century, and named it the Devil’s Tongue because it twisted this way and that, in a
most complicated and eerie way. The Devil’s Tongue was a very useful knot, and when Violet tied the
cloth strips together, end to end, it formed a sort of rope. As she worked, she remembered something her
parents had said to her when Klaus was born, and again when they brought Sunny home fromthe hospital.
“You are the eldest Baudelaire child,” they had said, kindly but firmly. “And as the eldest, it will always
be your responsibility to look after your younger siblings. Promise us that you will always watch out for
themand make sure they don’t get into trouble.” Violet remembered her promise, and thought of Klaus,
whose bruised face still looked sore, and Sunny, dangling fromthe top of the tower like a flag, and began
working faster. Even though Count Olaf was of course the cause of all this misery, Violet felt as if she had
broken her promise to her parents, and vowed to make it right.
Eventually, using enough of the ugly clothing, Violet had a rope that was, she hoped, just over thirty feet
long. She tied one end of it to the metal spider, and looked at her handiwork. What she had made was
called a grappling hook, which is something used for climbing up the sides of buildings, usually for a
nefarious purpose. Using the metal end to hook onto something at the top of the tower, and the rope to aid
her climb, Violet hoped to reach the top of the tower, untie Sunny’s cage, and climb back down. This was,
of course, a very risky plan, both because it was dangerous, and because she had made the grappling hook
herself, instead of purchasing it at a store that sold such things. But a grappling hook was all Violet could
think of to make without a proper inventing laboratory, and time was running short. She hadn’t told Klaus
about her plan, because she didn’t want to give himfalse hope, so without waking him, she gathered up
her grappling hook and tiptoed out of the room.
Once outside, Violet realized her plan was even more difficult than she had thought. The night was
quiet, which would mean she would have to make practically no noise at all. The night also had a slight
breeze, and when she pictured herself swinging in the breeze, clinging to a rope made of ugly clothing,
she almost gave up entirely. And the night was dark, so it was hard to see where she could toss the
grappling hook and have the metal arms hook onto something. But, standing there shivering in her
nightgown, Violet knew she had to try. Using her right hand, she threw the grappling hook as high and as
hard as she could, and waited to see if it would catch onto something.
Clang! The hook made a loud noise as it hit the tower, but it didn’t stick to anything, and came crashing
back down. Her heart pounding, Violet stood stock-still, wondering if Count Olaf or one of his
accomplices would come and investigate. But nobody arrived after a few moments, and Violet, swinging
the hook over her head like a lasso, tried again.
Clang! Clang! The grappling hook hit the tower twice as it bounced back down to the ground. Violet
waited again, listening for footsteps, but all she heard was her own terrified pulse. She decided to try one
more time.
Clang! The grappling hook hit the tower, and fell down again, hitting Violet hard in the shoulder. One
of the arms tore her nightgown and cut through her skin. Biting down on her hand to keep fromcrying out
in pain, Violet felt the place in her shoulder where she had been struck, and it was wet with blood. Her
armthrobbed in pain.
At this point in the proceedings, if I were Violet, I would have given up, but just as she was about to
turn around and go inside the house, she pictured how scared Sunny must be, and, ignoring the pain in her
shoulder, Violet used her right hand to throw the hook again.
Clang! The usual clang! sound stopped halfway through, and Violet saw in the dimlight of the moon
that the hook wasn’t falling. Nervously, she gave the rope a good yank, and it stayed put. The grappling
hook had worked!
Her feet touching the side of the stone tower and her hands grasping the rope, Violet closed her eyes
and began to climb. Never daring to look around, she pulled herself up the tower, hand over hand, all the
time keeping in mind her promise to her parents and the horrible things Count Olaf would do if his
villainous plan worked. The evening wind blew harder and harder as she climbed higher and higher, and
several times Violet had to stop climbing as the rope moved in the wind. She was certain that at any
moment the cloth would tear, or the hook would slip, and Violet would be sent tumbling to her death. But
thanks to her adroit inventing skills-the word “adroit” here means “skillful”-everything worked the way it
was supposed to work, and suddenly Violet found herself feeling a piece of metal instead of a cloth rope.
She opened her eyes and saw her sister Sunny, who was looking at her frantically and trying to say
something past the strip of tape. Violet had arrived at the top of the tower, right at the window where
Sunny was tied.
The eldest Baudelaire orphan was about to grab her sister’s cage and begin her descent when she saw
something that made her stop. It was the spidery end of the grappling hook, which after several attempts
had finally stuck onto something on the tower. Violet had guessed, during her climb, that it had found some
notch in the stone, or part of the window, or perhaps a piece of furniture inside the tower room, and stuck
there. But that wasn’t what the hook had stuck on. Violet’s grappling hook had stuck on another hook. It
was one of the hooks on the hook-handed man. And his other hook, Violet saw, was glinting in the
moonlight as it reached right toward her.
Chapter
Eleven
“How pleasant that you could join us,” the hook-handed man said in a sickly sweet voice. Violet
immediately tried to scurry back down the rope, but Count Olaf’s assistant was too quick for her. In one
movement he hoisted her into the tower roomand, with a flick of his hook, sent her rescue device clanging
to the ground. Now Violet was as trapped as her sister. “I’mso glad you’re here,” the hook-handed man
said. “I was just thinking how much I wanted to see your pretty face. Have a seat.”
“What are you going to do with me?” Violet asked.
“I said have a seat!” the hook-handed man snarled, and pushed her into a chair.
Violet looked around the dimand messy room. I amcertain that over the course of your own life, you
have noticed that people’s rooms reflect their personalities. In my room, for instance, I have gathered a
collection of objects that are important to me, including a dusty accordion on which I can play a few sad
songs, a large bundle of notes on the activities of the Baudelaire orphans, and a blurry photograph, taken a
very long time ago, of a woman whose name is Beatrice. These are items that are very precious and dear
to me. The tower roomheld objects that were very dear and precious to Count Olaf, and they were
terrible things. There were scraps of paper on which he had written his evil ideas in an illegible scrawl,
lying in messy piles on top of the copy of Nuptial Law he had taken away fromKlaus. There were a few
chairs and a handful of candles which were giving off flickering shadows. Littered all over the floor were
empty wine bottles and dirty dishes. But most of all were the drawings and paintings and carvings of eyes,
big and small, all over the room. There were eyes painted on the ceilings, and scratched into the grimy
wooden floors. There were eyes scrawled along the windowsill, and one big eye painted on the knob of
the door that led to the stairs. It was a terrible place.
The hook-handed man reached into a pocket of his greasy overcoat and pulled out a walkie-talkie. With
some difficulty, he pressed a button and waited a moment. “Boss, it’s me,” he said. “Your blushing bride
just climbed up here to try and rescue the biting brat.” He paused as Count Olaf said something. “I don’t
know. With some sort of rope.”
“It was a grappling hook,” Violet said, and tore off a sleeve of her nightgown to make a bandage for her
shoulder. “I made it myself.”
“She says it was a grappling hook,” the hook-handed man said into the walkie-talkie. “I don’t know,
boss. Yes, boss. Yes, boss, of course I understand she’s yours. Yes, boss.” He pressed a button to
disconnect the line, and then turned to face Violet. “Count Olaf is very displeased with his bride.”
“I’mnot his bride,” Violet said bitterly.
“Very soon you will be,” the hook-handed man said, wagging his hook the way most people would wag
a finger. “In the meantime, however, I have to go and fetch your brother. The three of you will be locked
in this roomuntil night falls. That way, Count Olaf can be sure you will all stay out of mischief.” With
that, the hook-handed man stomped out of the room. Violet heard the door lock behind him, and then
listened to his footsteps fading away down the stairs. She immediately went over to Sunny, and put a hand
on her little head. Afraid to untie or untape her sister for fear of incurring-a word which here means
“bringing about”-Count Olaf’s wrath, Violet stroked Sunny’s hair and murmured that everything was all
right.
But of course, everything was not all right. Everything was all wrong. As the first light of morning
trickled into the tower room, Violet reflected on all the awful things she and her siblings had experienced
recently. Their parents had died, suddenly and horribly. Mrs. Poe had bought themugly clothing. They had
moved into Count Olaf’s house and were treated terribly. Mr. Poe had refused to help them. They had
discovered a fiendish plot involving marrying Violet and stealing the Baudelaire fortune. Klaus had tried
to confront Olaf with knowledge he’d learned in Justice Strauss’s library and failed. Poor Sunny had been
captured. And now, Violet had tried to rescue Sunny and found herself captured as well. All in all, the
Baudelaire orphans had encountered catastrophe after catastrophe, and Violet found their situation
lamentably deplorable, a phrase which here means “it was not at all enjoyable.” The sound of footsteps
coming up the stairs brought Violet out of her thoughts, and soon the hook-handed man opened the door
and thrust a very tired, confused, and scared Klaus into the room.
“Here’s the last orphan,” the hook-handed man said. “And now, I must go help Count Olaf with final
preparations for tonight’s performance. No monkey business, you two, or I will have to tie you up and let
you dangle out of the window as well.” Glaring at them, he locked the door again and tromped
downstairs.
Klaus blinked and looked around the filthy room. He was still in his pajamas. “What has happened?”
he asked Violet. “Why are we up here?”
“I tried to rescue Sunny,” Violet said, “using an invention of mine to climb up the tower.”
Klaus went over to the window and looked down at the ground. “It’s so high up,” he said. “You must
have been terrified.”
“It was very scary,” she admitted, “but not as scary as the thought of marrying Count Olaf.”
“I’msorry your invention didn’t work,” Klaus said sadly.
“The invention worked fine,” Violet said, rubbing her sore shoulder. “I just got caught. And now we’re
doomed. The hook-handed man said he’d keep us here until tonight, and then it’s The Marvelous
Marriage.”
“Do you think you could invent something that would help us escape?” Klaus asked, looking around the
room.
“Maybe,” Violet said. “And why don’t you go through those books and papers? Perhaps there’s some
information that could be of use.”
For the next few hours, Violet and Klaus searched the roomand their own minds for anything that might
help them. Violet looked for objects with which she could invent something. Klaus read through Count
Olaf’s papers and books. Fromtime to time, they would go over to Sunny and smile at her, and pat her
head, to reassure her. Occasionally, Violet and Klaus would speak to each other, but mostly they were
silent, lost in their own thoughts.
“If we had any kerosene,” Violet said, around noon, “I could make Molotov cocktails with these
bottles.”
“What are Molotov cocktails?” Klaus asked.
“They’re small bombs made inside bottles,” Violet explained. “We could throw themout the window
and attract the attention of passersby.”
“But we don’t have any kerosene,” Klaus said mournfully.
They were silent for several hours.
“If we were polygamists,” Klaus said, “Count Olaf’s marriage plan wouldn’t work.”
“What are polygamists?” Violet asked.
“Polygamists are people who marry more than one person,” Klaus explained. “In this community,
polygamists are breaking the law, even if they have married in the presence of a judge, with the statement
of ‘I do’ and the signed document in their own hand. I read it here in Nuptial Law.”
“But we’re not polygamists,” Violet said mournfully.
They were silent for several more hours.
“We could break these bottles in half,” Violet said, “and use themas knives, but I’mafraid that Count
Olaf’s troupe would overpower us.”
“You could say ‘I don’t’ instead of ‘I do,’ ” Klaus said, “but I’mafraid Count Olaf would order Sunny
dropped off the tower.”
“I certainly would,” Count Olaf said, and the children jumped. They had been so involved in their
conversation that they hadn’t heard himcome up the stairs and open the door. He was wearing a fancy suit
and his eyebrow had been waxed so it looked as shiny as his eyes. Behind himstood the hook-handed
man, who smiled and waved a hook at the youngsters. “Come, orphans,” Count Olaf said. “It is time for
the big event. My associate here will stay behind in this room, and we will keep in constant contact
through our walkie-talkies. If anything goes wrong during tonight’s performance, your sister will be
dropped to her death. Come along now.”
Violet and Klaus looked at each other, and then at Sunny, still dangling in her cage, and followed Count
Olaf out the door. As Klaus walked down the tower stairs, he felt a heavy sinking in his heart as all hope
left him. There truly seemed to be no way out of their predicament. Violet was feeling the same way, until
she reached out with her right hand to grasp the banister, for balance. She looked at her right hand for a
second, and began to think. All the way down the stairs, and out the door, and the short walk down the
block to the theater, Violet thought and thought and thought, harder than she had in her entire life.
Chapter
Twelve
As Violet and Klaus Baudelaire stood, still in their nightgown and pajamas, backstage at Count Olaf’s
theater, they were of two minds, a phrase which here means “they felt two different ways at the same
time.” On one hand, they were of course filled with dread. Fromthe murmur of voices they heard on the
stage, the two Baudelaire orphans could tell that the performance of The Marvelous Marriage had begun,
and it seemed too late to do anything to foil Count Olaf’s plan. On the other hand, however, they were
fascinated, as they had never been backstage at a theatrical production and there was so much to see.
Members of Count Olaf’s theater troupe hurried this way and that, too busy to even glance at the children.
Three very short men were carrying a large flat piece of wood, painted to look like a living room. The
two white-faced women were arranging flowers in a vase that fromfar away appeared to be marble, but
close up looked more like cardboard. An important-looking man with warts all over his face was
adjusting enormous light fixtures. As the children peeked onstage, they could see Count Olaf, in his fancy
suit, declaiming some lines fromthe play, just as the curtain came down, controlled by a woman with very
short hair who was pulling on a long rope, attached to a pulley. Despite their fear, you see, the two older
Baudelaires were very interested in what was going on, and only wished that they were not involved in
any way.
As the curtain fell, Count Olaf strode offstage and looked at the children. “It’s the end of Act Two! Why
aren’t the orphans in their costumes?” he hissed to the two white-faced women. Then, as the audience
broke into applause, his angry expression turned to one of joy, and he walked back onstage. Gesturing to
the short-haired woman to raise the curtain he strode to the exact center of the stage and took elaborate
bows as the curtain came up. He waved and blew kisses to the audience as the curtain came down again,
and then his face once again filled with anger. “Intermission is only ten minutes,” he said, “and then the
children must perform. Get theminto costumes, quickly!”
Without a word the two white-faced women grabbed Violet and Klaus by the wrists and led theminto a
dressing room. The room was dusty but shiny, covered in mirrors and tiny lights so the actors could see
better to put on their makeup and wigs, and there were people calling out to one another and laughing as
they changed their clothes. One white-faced woman yanked Violet’s arms up and pulled her nightgown off
over her head, and thrust a dirty, lacy white dress at her to put on. Klaus, meanwhile, had his pajamas
removed by the other white-faced woman, and was hurriedly stuffed into a blue sailor suit that itched and
made himlook like a toddler.
“Isn’t this exciting?” said a voice, and the children turned to see Justice Strauss, all dressed up in her
judge’s robes and powdered wig. She was clutching a small book. “You children look wonderful!”
“So do you,” Klaus said. “What’s that book?”
“Why, those are my lines,” Justice Strauss said. “Count Olaf told me to bring a law book and read the
real wedding ceremony, in order to make the play as realistic as possible. All you have to say, Violet, is
‘I do,’ but I have to make quite a speech. This is going to be such fun.”
“You know what would be fun,” Violet said carefully, “is if you changed your lines around, just a
little.”
Klaus’s face lit up. “Yes, Justice Strauss. Be creative. There’s no reason to stick to the legal ceremony.
It’s not as if it’s a real wedding.”
Justice Strauss frowned. “I don’t know about that, children,” she said. “I think it would be best to
follow Count Olaf’s instructions. After all, he’s in charge.”
“Justice Strauss!” a voice called. “Justice Strauss! Please report to the makeup artist!”
“Oh my word! I get to wear makeup.” Justice Strauss had on a dreamy expression, as if she were about
to be crowned queen, instead of just having some powders and creams smeared on her face. “Children, I
must go. See you onstage, my dears!”
Justice Strauss ran off, leaving the children to finish changing into their costumes. One of the whitefaced
women put a flowered headdress on Violet, who realized in horror that the dress she had changed
into was a bridal gown. The other woman put a sailor cap on Klaus, who gazed in one of the mirrors,
astonished at how ugly he looked. His eyes met those of Violet, who was looking in the mirror as well.
“What can we do?” Klaus said quietly. “Pretend to be sick? Maybe they’d call off the performance.”
“Count Olaf would know what we were up to,” Violet replied glumly.
“Act Three of The Marvelous Marriage by Al Funcoot is about to begin!” a man with a clipboard
shouted. “Everyone, please, get in your places for Act Three!”
The actors rushed out of the room, and the white-faced women grabbed the children and hustled them
out after them. The backstage area was in complete pandemonium-a word which here means “actors and
stagehands running around attending to last-minute details.” The bald man with the long nose hurried by
the children, then stopped himself, looked at Violet in her wedding dress, and smirked.
“No funny stuff,” he said to them, waggling a bony finger. “Remember, when you go out there, just do
exactly what you’re supposed to do. Count Olaf will be holding his walkie-talkie during the entire act,
and if you do even one thing wrong, he’ll be giving Sunny a call up there in the tower.”
“Yes, yes,” Klaus said bitterly. He was tired of being threatened in the same way, over and over.
“You’d better do exactly as planned,” the man said again.
“I’msure they will,” said a voice suddenly, and the children turned to see Mr. Poe, dressed very
formally and accompanied by his wife. He smiled at the children and came over to shake their hands.
“Polly and I just wanted to tell you to break a leg.”
“What?” Klaus said, alarmed.
“That’s a theater term,” Mr. Poe explained, “meaning ‘good luck on tonight’s performance.’ I’mglad
that you children have adjusted to life with your new father and are participating in family activities.”
“Mr. Poe,” Klaus said quickly, “Violet and I have something to tell you. It’s very important.”
“What is it?” Mr. Poe said.
“Yes,” said Count Olaf, “what is it you have to tell Mr. Poe, children?”
Count Olaf had appeared, seemingly out of nowhere, and his shiny eyes glared at the children
meaningfully. In one hand, Violet and Klaus could see, he held a walkie-talkie.
“Just that we appreciate all you’ve done for us, Mr. Poe,” Klaus said weakly. “That’s all we wanted to
say.”
“Of course, of course,” Mr. Poe said, patting himon the back. “Well, Polly and I had better take our
seats. Break a leg, Baudelaires!”
“I wish we could break a leg,” Klaus whispered to Violet, and Mr. Poe left.
“You will, soon enough,” Count Olaf said, pushing the two children toward the stage. Other actors
were milling about, finding their places for Act Three, and Justice Strauss was off in a corner, practicing
her lines fromher law book. Klaus took a look around the stage, wondering if anyone there could help.
The bald man with the long nose took Klaus’s hand and led himto one side.
“You and I will stand here for the duration of the act. That means the whole thing.”
“I know what the word ‘duration’ means,” Klaus said.
“No nonsense,” the bald man said. Klaus watched his sister in her wedding gown take her place next to
Count Olaf as the curtain rose. Klaus heard applause fromthe audience as Act Three of The Marvelous
Marriage began.
It will be of no interest to you if I describe the action of this insipid-the word “insipid” here means
“dull and foolish”-play by Al Funcoot, because it was a dreadful play and of no real importance to our
story. Various actors and actresses performed very dull dialogue and moved around the set, as Klaus tried
to make eye contact with themand see if they would help. He soon realized that this play must have been
chosen merely as an excuse for Olaf’s evil plan, and not for its entertainment value, as he sensed the
audience losing interest and moving around in their seats. Klaus turned his attention to the audience to see
whether any of themwould notice that something was afoot, but the way the wart-faced man had arranged
the lights prevented Klaus fromseeing the faces in the auditorium, and he could only make out the dim
outlines of the people in the audience. Count Olaf had a great number of very long speeches, which he
performed with elaborate gestures and facial expressions. No one seemed to notice that he held a walkietalkie
the entire time.
Finally, Justice Strauss began speaking, and Klaus saw that she was reading directly fromthe legal
book. Her eyes were sparkling and her face flushed as she performed onstage for the first time, too
stagestruck to realize she was a part of Olaf’s plan. She spoke on and on about Olaf and Violet caring for
each other in sickness and in health, in good times and bad, and all of those things that are said to many
people who decide, for one reason or another, to get married.
When she finished her speech, Justice Strauss turned to Count Olaf and asked, “Do you take this woman
to be your lawfully wedded wife?”
“I do,” Count Olaf said, smiling. Klaus saw Violet shudder.
“Do you,” Justice Strauss said, turning to Violet, “take this man to be your lawfully wedded husband?”
“I do,” Violet said. Klaus clenched his fists. His sister had said “I do” in the presence of a judge. Once
she signed the official document, the wedding was legally valid. And now, Klaus could see that Justice
Strauss was taking the document fromone of the other actors and holding it out to Violet to sign.
“Don’t move an inch,” the bald man muttered to Klaus, and Klaus thought of poor Sunny, dangling at the
top of the tower, and stood still as he watched Violet take a long quill pen fromCount Olaf. Violet’s eyes
were wide as she looked down at the document, and her face was pale, and her left hand was trembling as
she signed her name.
Chapter
Thirteen
“And now, ladies and gentlemen,” Count Olaf said, stepping forward to address the audience, “I have an
announcement. There is no reason to continue tonight’s performance, for its purpose has been served. This
has not been a scene of fiction. My marriage to Violet Baudelaire is perfectly legal, and now I amin
control of her entire fortune.”
There were gasps fromthe audience, and some of the actors looked at one another in shock. Not
everyone, apparently, had known about Olaf’s plan. “That can’t be!” Justice Strauss cried.
“The marriage laws in this community are quite simple,” Count Olaf said. “The bride must say ‘I do’ in
the presence of a judge like yourself, and sign an explanatory document. And all of you”-here Count Olaf
gestured out to the audience-“are witnesses.”
“But Violet is only a child!” one of the actors said. “She’s not old enough to marry.”
“She is if her legal guardian agrees,” Count Olaf said, “and in addition to being her husband, I amher
legal guardian.”
“But that piece of paper is not an official document!” Justice Strauss said. “That’s just a stage prop!”
Count Olaf took the paper fromViolet’s hand and gave it to Justice Strauss. “I think if you look at it
closely you will see it is an official document fromCity Hall.”
Justice Strauss took the document in her hand and read it quickly. Then, closing her eyes, she sighed
deeply and furrowed her brow, thinking hard. Klaus watched her and wondered if this were the
expression Justice Strauss had on her face whenever she was serving on the High Court. “You’re right,”
she said finally, to Count Olaf, “this marriage, unfortunately, is completely legal. Violet said ‘I do,’ and
signed her name here on this paper. Count Olaf, you are Violet’s husband, and therefore in complete
control of her estate.”
“That can’t be!” said a voice fromthe audience, and Klaus recognized it as the voice of Mr. Poe. He
ran up the stairs to the stage and took the document fromJustice Strauss. “This is dreadful nonsense.”
“I’mafraid this dreadful nonsense is the law,” Justice Strauss said. Her eyes were filling up with tears.
“I can’t believe how easily I was tricked,” she said. “I would never do anything to harmyou children.
Never.”
“You were easily tricked,” Count Olaf said, grinning, and the judge began to cry. “It was child’s play,
winning this fortune. Now, if all of you will excuse me, my bride and I need to go home for our wedding
night.”
“First let Sunny go!” Klaus burst out. “You promised to let her go!”
“Where is Sunny?” Mr. Poe asked.
“She’s all tied up at the moment,” Count Olaf said, “if you will pardon a little joke.” His eyes shone as
he pressed buttons on the walkie-talkie, and waited while the hook-handed man answered. “Hello? Yes,
of course it’s me, you idiot. Everything has gone according to plan. Please remove Sunny fromher cage
and bring her directly to the theater. Klaus and Sunny have some chores to do before they go to bed.”
Count Olaf gave Klaus a sharp look. “Are you satisfied now?” he asked.
“Yes,” Klaus said quietly. He wasn’t satisfied at all, of course, but at least his baby sister was no
longer dangling froma tower.
“Don’t think you’re so safe,” the bald man whispered to Klaus. “Count Olaf will take care of you and
your sisters later. He doesn’t want to do it in front of all these people.” He did not have to explain to
Klaus what he meant by the phrase “take care of.”
“Well, I’mnot satisfied at all,” Mr. Poe said. “This is absolutely horrendous. This is completely
monstrous. This is financially dreadful.”
“I’mafraid, however,” Count Olaf said, “that it is legally binding. Tomorrow, Mr. Poe, I shall come
down to the bank and withdraw the complete Baudelaire fortune.”
Mr. Poe opened his mouth as if to say something, but began to cough instead. For several seconds he
coughed into a handkerchief while everyone waited for himto speak. “I won’t allow it,” Mr. Poe finally
gasped, wiping his mouth. “I absolutely will not allow it.”
“I’mafraid you have to,” Count Olaf replied. “I’m-I’mafraid Olaf is right,” Justice Strauss said,
through her tears. “This marriage is legally binding.”
“Begging your pardon,” Violet said suddenly, “but I think you may be wrong.”
Everyone turned to look at the eldest Baudelaire orphan.
“What did you say, Countess?” Olaf said.
“I’mnot your countess,” Violet said testily, a word which here means “in an extremely annoyed tone.”
“At least, I don’t think I am.”
“And why is that?” Count Olaf said.
“I did not sign the document in my own hand, as the law states,” Violet said.
“What do you mean? We all saw you!” Count Olaf’s eyebrow was beginning to rise in anger.
“I’mafraid your husband is right, dear,” Justice Strauss said sadly. “There’s no use denying it. There
are too many witnesses.”
“Like most people,” Violet said, “I amright-handed. But I signed the document with my left hand.”
“What?” Count Olaf cried. He snatched the paper fromJustice Strauss and looked down at it. His eyes
were shining very bright. “You are a liar!” he hissed at Violet.
“No she’s not,” Klaus said excitedly. “I remember, because I watched her left hand trembling as she
signed her name.”
“It is impossible to prove,” Count Olaf said.
“If you like,” Violet said, “I shall be happy to sign my name again, on a separate sheet of paper, with
my right hand and then with my left. Then we can see which signature the one on the document most
resembles.”
“A small detail, like which hand you used to sign,” Count Olaf said, “doesn’t matter in the least. “
“If you don’t mind, sir,” Mr. Poe said, “I’d like Justice Strauss to make that decision.”
Everyone looked at Justice Strauss, who was wiping away the last of her tears. “Let me see,” she said
quietly, and closed her eyes again. She sighed deeply, and the Baudelaire orphans, and all who liked
them, held their breath as Justice Strauss furrowed her brow, thinking hard on the situation. Finally, she
smiled. “If Violet is indeed right-handed,” she said carefully, “and she signed the document with her left
hand, then it follows that the signature does not fulfill the requirements of the nuptial laws. The law
clearly states the document must be signed in the bride’s own hand. Therefore, we can conclude that this
marriage is invalid. Violet, you are not a countess, and Count Olaf, you are not in control of the
Baudelaire fortune.”
“Hooray!” cried a voice fromthe audience, and several people applauded. Unless you are a lawyer, it
will probably strike you as odd that Count Olaf’s plan was defeated by Violet signing with her left hand
instead of her right. But the law is an odd thing. For instance, one country in Europe has a law that
requires all its bakers to sell bread at the exact same price. A certain island has a law that forbids anyone
fromremoving its fruit. And a town not too far fromwhere you live has a law that bars me fromcoming
within five miles of its borders. Had Violet signed the marriage contract with her right hand, the law
would have made her a miserable countess, but because she signed it with her left, she remained, to her
relief, a miserable orphan.
What was good news to Violet and her siblings, of course, was bad news to Count Olaf. Nevertheless,
he gave everyone a grimsmile. “In that case,” he said to Violet, pushing a button on the walkie-talkie,
“you will either marry me again, and correctly this time, or I will-”
“Neepo!” Sunny’s unmistakable voice rang out over Count Olaf’s as she tottered onstage toward her
siblings. The hook-handed man followed behind her, his walkie-talkie buzzing and crackling. Count Olaf
was too late.
“Sunny! You’re safe!” Klaus cried, and embraced her. Violet rushed over and the two older
Baudelaires fussed over the youngest one.
“Somebody bring her something to eat,” Violet said. “She must be very hungry after hanging in a tower
window all that time.”
“Cake!” Sunny shrieked.
“Argh!” Count Olaf roared. He began to pace back and forth like an animal in a cage, pausing only to
point a finger at Violet. “You may not be my wife,” he said, “but you are still my daughter, and-”
“Do you honestly think,” Mr. Poe said in an exasperated voice, “that I will allow you to continue to
care for these three children, after the treachery I have seen here tonight?”
“The orphans are mine,” Count Olaf insisted, “and with me they shall stay. There is nothing illegal
about trying to marry someone.”
“But there is something illegal about dangling an infant out of a tower window,” Justice Strauss said
indignantly. “You, Count Olaf, will go to jail, and the three children will live with me.”
“Arrest him!” a voice said fromthe audience, and other people took up the cry.
“Send himto jail!”
“He’s an evil man!”
“And give us our money back! It was a lousy play!”
Mr. Poe took Count Olaf’s armand, after a brief eruption of coughs, announced in a harsh voice, “I
hereby arrest you in the name of the law.”
“Oh, Justice Strauss!” Violet said. “Did you really mean what you said? Can we really live with you?”
“Of course I mean it,” Justice Strauss said. “I amvery fond of you children, and I feel responsible for
your welfare.”
“Can we use your library every day?” Klaus asked.
“Can we work in the garden?” Violet asked.
“Cake!” Sunny shrieked again, and everyone laughed.
At this point in the story, I feel obliged to interrupt and give you one last warning. As I said at the very
beginning, the book you are holding in your hands does not have a happy ending. It may appear now that
Count Olaf will go to jail and that the three Baudelaire youngsters will live happily ever after with Justice
Strauss, but it is not so. If you like, you may shut the book this instant and not read the unhappy ending that
is to follow. You may spend the rest of your life believing that the Baudelaires triumphed over Count Olaf
and lived the rest of their lives in the house and library of Justice Strauss, but that is not how the story
goes. For as everyone was laughing at Sunny’s cry for cake, the important-looking man with all the warts
on his face was sneaking toward the controls for the lighting of the theater.
Quick as a wink, the man flicked the main switch so that all the lights went off and everyone was
standing in darkness. Instantly, pandemoniumensued as everyone ran this way and that, shouting at one
another. Actors tripped over members of the audience. Members of the audience tripped over theatrical
props. Mr. Poe grabbed his wife, thinking it was Count Olaf. Klaus grabbed Sunny and held her up as high
as he could, so she wouldn’t get hurt. But Violet knew at once what had happened, and made her way
carefully to where she remembered the lights had been. When the play was being performed, Violet had
watched the light controls carefully, taking mental notes in case these devices came in handy for an
invention. She was certain if she could find the switch she could turn it back on. Her arms stretched in
front of her as if she were blind, Violet made her way across the stage, stepping carefully around pieces
of furniture and startled actors. In the darkness, Violet looked like a ghost, her white wedding gown
moving slowly across the stage. Then, just as she had reached the switch, Violet felt a hand on her
shoulder. A figure leaned in to whisper into her ear.
“I’ll get my hands on your fortune if it’s the last thing I do,” the voice hissed. “And when I have it, I’ll
kill you and your siblings with my own two hands.”
Violet gave a little cry of terror, but flicked the switch on. The entire theater was flooded with light.
Everyone blinked and looked around. Mr. Poe let go of his wife. Klaus put Sunny down. But nobody was
touching Violet’s shoulder. Count Olaf was gone.
“Where did he go?” Mr. Poe shouted. “Where did they all go?”
The Baudelaire youngsters looked around and saw that not only had Count Olaf vanished, but his
accomplices-the wart-faced man, the hook-handed man, the bald man with the long nose, the enormous
person who looked like neither a man nor a woman, and the two white-faced women-had vanished along
with him.
“They must have run outside,” Klaus said, “while it was still dark.”
Mr. Poe led the way outside, and Justice Strauss and the children followed. Way, way down the block,
they could see a long black car driving away into the night. Maybe it contained Count Olaf and his
associates. Maybe it didn’t. But in any case, it turned a corner and disappeared into the dark city as the
children watched without a word.
“Blast it,” Mr. Poe said. “They’re gone. But don’t worry, children, we’ll catch them. I’mgoing to go
call the police immediately.”
Violet, Klaus, and Sunny looked at one another and knew that it wasn’t as simple as Mr. Poe said.
Count Olaf would take care to stay out of sight as he planned his next move. He was far too clever to be
captured by the likes of Mr. Poe.
“Well, let’s go home, children,” Justice Strauss said. “We can worry about this in the morning, when
I’ve fixed you a good breakfast.”
Mr. Poe coughed. “Wait a minute,” he said, looking down at the floor. “I’msorry to tell you this,
children, but I cannot allow you to be raised by someone who is not a relative.”
“What?” Violet cried. “After all Justice Strauss has done for us?”
“We never would have figured out Count Olaf’s plan without her and her library,” Klaus said.
“Without Justice Strauss, we would have lost our lives.”
“That may be so,” Mr. Poe said, “and I thank Justice Strauss for her generosity, but your parents’ will
is very specific. You must be adopted by a relative. Tonight you will stay with me in my home, and
tomorrow I shall go to the bank and figure out what to do with you. I’msorry, but that is the way it is.”
The children looked at Justice Strauss, who sighed heavily and hugged each of the Baudelaire
youngsters in turn. “Mr. Poe is right,” she said sadly. “He must respect your parents’ wishes. Don’t you
want to do what your parents wanted, children?”
Violet, Klaus, and Sunny pictured their loving parents, and wished more than ever that the fire had not
occurred. Never, never had they felt so alone. They wanted very badly to live with this kind and generous
woman, but they knew that it simply could not be done. “I guess you’re right, Justice Strauss,” Violet said
finally. “We will miss you very much.”
“I will miss you, too,” she said, and her eyes filled with tears once more. Then they each gave Justice
Strauss one last embrace, and followed Mr. and Mrs. Poe to their car. The Baudelaire orphans piled into
the backseat, and peered out the back window at Justice Strauss, who was crying and waving to them.
Ahead of themwere the darkened streets, where Count Olaf had escaped to plan more treachery. Behind
themwas the kind judge, who had taken such an interest in the three children. To Violet, Klaus, and
Sunny, it seemed that Mr. Poe and the law had made the incorrect decision to take themaway fromthe
possibility of a happy life with Justice Strauss and toward an unknown fate with some unknown relative.
They didn’t understand it, but like so many unfortunate events in life, just because you don’t understand it
doesn’t mean it isn’t so. The Baudelaires bunched up together against the cold night air, and kept waving
out the back window. The car drove farther and farther away, until Justice Strauss was merely a speck in
the darkness, and it seemed to the children that they were moving in an aberrant-the word “aberrant” here
means “very, very wrong, and causing much grief”-direction.
LEMONYSNICKETwas born in a small townwhere the inhabitantswere suspiciousand prone to riot. He nowlivesin the city. During hisspare time he gathers Evidence and isconsidered something of an expert by leading authorities. These are his
first booksfor Harper Collins.
To My Kind Editor;
I amwriting to you fromthe London branch of the Herpetological Society, where I amtrying to find out
what happened to the reptile collection of Dr. Montgomery Montgomery following the tragic events that
occurred while the Baudelaire orphans were in his care.
An associate of mine will place a small waterproof box in the phone booth of the Elektra Hotel at
11 P.M. next Tuesday. Please retrieve it before Midnight to avoid it falling into the wrong hands. In the
box you will find my description of these terrible events, entitled THE REPTILE ROOM, as well as a
map of Lousy Lane, a copy of the filmZombies in the Snow., and Dr. Montgomery's recipe for coconut
creamcake. I have also managed to track down one of the few photographs of Dr. Lucafont, In order to
help Mr. Helquist with his illustrations.
Remember, you are my last hope that the tales of the Baudelaire orphans can finally be told to the
general public.
With all due respect,
Lemony Snicket